<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
  <link href="../Styles/fonts.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Kaynakça</h1>

  <p>Aharonov, Y. ve Albert, D. Z. (1981). Can we make sense out of the measurement process in relativistic quantum mechanics? <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> D24, 359-70.</p>

  <p>Aharonov, Y., Bergmann, P. ve Lebowitz, J. L. (1964). Time symmetry in the quantum process of measurement. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> 134B, 1410-16.</p>

  <p>Ashtekar, A., Balachandran, A. P. ve Sang Jo (1989). The CP problem in quantum gravity. <span style="font-style:italic;">Int. J. Mod. Phys.,</span> A6, 1493-514.</p>

  <p>Aspect, A. ve Grangier, P. (1986). Experiments on Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-type correlations with pairs of visible photons. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum concepts in space and time</span> (ed. R. Penrose ve C. J. Isham) içinde, Oxford University Press.</p>

  <p>Atkins, P. W. (1987). <span style="font-style:italic;">Why mathematics works.</span> Oxford University Extension Lecture in series: Philosophy and the New Physics (13 Mart).</p>

  <p>Barbour, J. B (1989). <span style="font-style:italic;">Absolute or relative motion?</span> Cilt 1: <span style="font-style:italic;">The discovery of dynamics.</span> Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.</p>

  <p>Barrow, J. D. (1988). <span style="font-style:italic;">The world within the world.</span> Oxford University Press.</p>

  <p>Barrow, J. D. ve Tipler, F. J. (1986). <span style="font-style:italic;">The anthropic cosmological principle.</span> Oxford University Press.</p>

  <p>Baylor, D. A., Lamb, T. D. ve Yau, K.-W. (1979). Responses of retinal rods to single photons. <span style="font-style:italic;">J. Physiol.,</span> 288,613-34.</p>

  <p>Bekenstein, J. (1972). Black holes and entropy. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> D7, 2333-46.</p>

  <p>Belinfante, F. J. (1975). <span style="font-style:italic;">Measurement and time reversal in objective quantum theory.</span> Pergamon Press, New York.</p>

  <p>Belinskii, V. A., Khalatnikov, I. M. ve Lifshitz, E. M. (1970). Oscillatory approach to singular point in the relativistic cosmology. <span style="font-style:italic;">Adv. Phys.</span> 19,525-73.</p>

  <p>Bell, J. S. (1987). <span style="font-style:italic;">Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Benacerraf, P. (1967). God, the Devil and Gödel. <span style="font-style:italic;">The Monist,</span> 51,9-32.</p>

  <p>Blakemore, C. ve Greenfield, S. (ed.) (1987). <span style="font-style:italic;">Mindwaves: thoughts on intelligence, identity and consciousness.</span> Basil Blackwell, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Blum, L., Shub, M. ve Smale, S. (1989). On a theory of computation and complexity over the real numbers: NP completeness, recursive functions and universal machines. <span style="font-style:italic;">Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.,</span> 21,1-46.</p>

  <p>Bohm, D. (1951). The paradox of Einstein, Rosen and Podolsky. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. <span style="font-style:italic;">A.</span> Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory,</span> D. Bohm, Ch. 22, sect. 15-19. Prentioe-Hall, Englewood-Cliffs.</p>

  <p>Bohm, D. (1952). A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ‘hidden’ variables, I and II, <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> 85,166-93.</p>

  <p>Bondi, H. (1960). Gravitational waves in general relativity. <span style="font-style:italic;">Nature (London),</span> 186, 535.</p>

  <p>Bowie, G. L. (1982). Lucas’ number is finally up. <span style="font-style:italic;">J. of Philosophical Logic</span>, 11,279-85.</p>

  <p>Brooks, R. ve Matelski, J. P. (1981), The dynamics of 2-generator subgroups of PSL(2,C), Riemann surfaces and related topics: <span style="font-style:italic;">Proceedings of the 1978 Stony Brook Conferenee,</span> I. Kra ve B. Maskit (ed.), <span style="font-style:italic;">Ann. Math Studies,</span> 97. Princeton University Press, Princeton.</p>

  <p>Cartan, E. (1923). Sur les varietes â connexion afime et la theorie de la relativité généralisée. <span style="font-style:italic;">Ann. Sci. Ec. Norm. Sup.,</span> 40,325-412.</p>

  <p>Chandrasekhar, S. (1987). <span style="font-style:italic;">Truth and beauty: aesthetics and motivations in science.</span> University of Chicago Press.</p>

  <p>Church, A. (1941). <span style="font-style:italic;">The calculi of lambda-conversion.</span> Annals of Mathematics Studies, no. 6. Princeton University Press.</p>

  <p>Churchland, P. M. (1984). <span style="font-style:italic;">Matter and consciousness.</span> Bradford Books, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.</p>

  <p>Clauser, J. F., Home, A. H., Shimony, A. ve Holt, R. A. (1969). Proposed experiment to test local hidden-variable theories. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev. Lett,</span> 23,880-4.</p>

  <p>Close, F. (1983). <span style="font-style:italic;">The cosmic onion: quarks and the nature of the universe.</span> Heinemann, Londra.</p>

  <p>Cohen, P. C. (1966). <span style="font-style:italic;">Set theory and the continuum hypothesis.</span> Benjamin, Menlo Park, CA.</p>

  <p>Cutland, N. J. (1980). <span style="font-style:italic;">Computability: an introduction to recursive function theory.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Davies, P. C. W. (1974). <span style="font-style:italic;">The physics of time-asymmetry.</span> Surrey University Press.</p>

  <p>Davies, P. C. W. ve Brown, J. (1988). <span style="font-style:italic;">Superstrings: a theory of everything?</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Davies, R. D., Lasenby, A. N., Watson, R. A., Daintree, E. J., Hopkins, J., Beckman, J., Sanchez-Almeida, J. ve Rebolo, R. (1987). Sensitive measurement of fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background. <span style="font-style:italic;">Nature,</span> 326, 462-5.</p>

  <p>Davis, M. (1988). Mathematical logic and the origin of modern computers. <span style="font-style:italic;">The universal Turing machine: a half-century survey</span> (ed. R. Herken) içinde, Kammerer &amp; Unverzagt, Hamburg.</p>

  <p>Dawkins, R. (1986). <span style="font-style:italic;">The blind watchmaker.</span> Longman, Londra.</p>

  <p>de Broglie, L. (1956). <span style="font-style:italic;">Tentative d’interpr</span>é<span style="font-style:italic;">tation causale et notlin</span>é<span style="font-style:italic;">aire de la mecanique ondulatoire.</span> Gauthier-Villars, Paris.</p>

  <p>Deeke, L., Grötzinger, B. ve Kornhuber, H. H. (1976). Voluntary finger movements in man: cerebral potentials and theory. <span style="font-style:italic;">Biol. Cybemetics,</span> 23,99.</p>

  <p>Delbrück, M. (1986). <span style="font-style:italic;">Mind from matter?</span> Blackwell Scientific Publishing, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Dennett, D. C. (1978). <span style="font-style:italic;">Brainstorms.</span> Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology, Harvester Press, Hassocks, Sussex.</p>

  <p>Deutsch, D. (1985). Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the universal quantum Computer. <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lond.),</span> A400,97-117.</p>

  <p>Devlin, K. (1988). <span style="font-style:italic;">Mathematics: the new golden age.</span> Penguin Books, Londra.</p>

  <p>De Witt, B. S. ve Graham, R. D. (ed.) (1973). <span style="font-style:italic;">The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.</span> Princeton University Press.</p>

  <p>Dirac, P. A. M. (1928). The quantum theory of the electron. <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lond.),</span> A117, 610-24; <span style="font-style:italic;">ditto,</span> part II, <span style="font-style:italic;">ibid.,</span> A118, 361.</p>

  <p>Dirac, P. A. M. (1938). Classical theory of radiating electrons. <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lond.),</span> A167,148.</p>

  <p>Dirac, P. A. M. (1939). The relations between mathematics and physics. <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Roy. Soc., Edinburgh,</span> 59,122.</p>

  <p>Dirac, P. A. M. (1947). <span style="font-style:italic;">The principles of quantum mechanics</span> (3. baskı), Oxford University Press.</p>

  <p>Dirac, P. A. M. (1982). Pretty mathematics. <span style="font-style:italic;">Int. J. Theor. Phys.,</span> 21,603-5.</p>

  <p>Drake, S. (çev.) (1953). <span style="font-style:italic;">Galileo Galilei: dialogue concerning the two chief world systems</span> -<span style="font-style:italic;">Ptolemaic and Copernican.</span> University of California, Berkeley, 1953.</p>

  <p>Drake, S. (1957). <span style="font-style:italic;">Discoveries and opinions of Galileo.</span> Doubleday, New York.</p>

  <p>Eccles. J. C. (1973). <span style="font-style:italic;">The understanding of the brain.</span> McGraw-Hill, New York.</p>

  <p>Einstein, A., Podolsky, B. ve Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete? <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> 47,777-80.</p>

  <p>Everett, H. (1957). ‘Relative State' formulation of quantum mechanics. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek), Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Rev. of Mod. Phys.,</span> 29,454-62.</p>

  <p>Feferman, S. (1988). Turing in the Land of 0(z). <span style="font-style:italic;">The universal Turing machine: a half-century survey</span> (ed. R. Herken) içinde, Kammerer &amp; Unverzagt, Hamburg.</p>

  <p>Feynman, R. P. (1985). <span style="font-style:italic;">QED: the strange theory of light and matter,</span> Princeton University Press,</p>

  <p>Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R. B. ve Sands, M. (1965). <span style="font-style:italic;">The Feynman Lectures.</span> Addison-Wesley.</p>

  <p>Fodor, J. A. (1983). <span style="font-style:italic;">The modularity of mind.</span> MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.</p>

  <p>Fredkin, E. ve Toffoli, T. (1982). Conservative logic. <span style="font-style:italic;">Int. J. Theor, Phys.,</span> 21,219-53.</p>

  <p>Freedman, S. J. ve Clauser, J. F. (1972). Experimental test of local hidden-variable theories. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev. Lett.,</span> 28,938-41.</p>

  <p>Galilei, G. (1638). <span style="font-style:italic;">Dialogues concerning two new</span> <span style="font-style:italic;">Sciences.</span> Macmillan baskısı 1914; Dover Inc.</p>

  <p>Gandy, R. (1988). The confluence of ideas in 1936. <span style="font-style:italic;">The universal Turing machine: a half-century survey</span> (ed. R. Herken) içinde, Kammerer &amp; Unverzagt, Hamburg.</p>

  <p>Gardner, M. (1958). <span style="font-style:italic;">Logic machines and diagrams.</span> University of Chicago Press.</p>

  <p>Gardner, M. (1983). <span style="font-style:italic;">The whys of a philosophical scrivener.</span> William Morrow and Co., Inc., New York.</p>

  <p>Gardner, M. (1989). <span style="font-style:italic;">Penrose tiles to trapdoor ciphers.</span> W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.</p>

  <p>Gayle, F. W. (1987). Free-surface solidifîcation habit and point group symmetry of a faceted icosahedral Al-Li-Cu phase. <span style="font-style:italic;">J. Mater. Res.,</span> 2,1-4.</p>

  <p>Gazzaniga, M. S. (1970). <span style="font-style:italic;">The bisected brain.</span> Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.</p>

  <p>Gazzaniga, M. S., LeDoux, J. E. ve Wilson, D. H. (1977). Language, praxis, and the right hemisphere: clues to some mechanisms of consciousness. <span style="font-style:italic;">Neurology, 27,</span>1144-7.</p>

  <p>Geroch, R. ve Hartle, J. B. (1986). Computability and physical theories. <span style="font-style:italic;">Found. Phys.,</span> 16,533.</p>

  <p>Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A. ve Weber, T. (1980). A general argument against superlumi-nal transmiission through the quantum mechanical measurement process. <span style="font-style:italic;">Lett. Nuovo. Chim.,</span> 27, 293-8.</p>

  <p>Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A. ve Weber, T. (1986). Unifıed dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic systems. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> D34, 470.</p>

  <p>Gödel, K. (1931). Über formal unentscheidbare Sâtze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme I. <span style="font-style:italic;">Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik,</span> 38,173-98.</p>

  <p>Good, I. J. (1969). Gödel’s theorem is a red herring. <span style="font-style:italic;">Brit. J. Philos. Sci.,</span> 18, 359-73.</p>

  <p>Gregory, R. L. (1981). <span style="font-style:italic;">Mind in Science; A history of explanations in psychology and physics.</span> Weidenfeld and Nicholson Ltd.</p>

  <p>Grey Walter, W. (1953). <span style="font-style:italic;">The living brain.</span> Gerald Duckworth and Co. Ltd.</p>

  <p>Grünbaum, B. ve Shephard, G. C. (1981). Some problems on plane tilings. <span style="font-style:italic;">The mathematical Gardner</span> (ed. D. A. Klarner) içinde, Prindle, Weber and Schmidt, Boston.</p>

  <p>Grünbaum, B. ve Shephard, G. C. (1987). <span style="font-style:italic;">Tilings and patterns.</span> W. H. Freeman.</p>

  <p>Hadamard, J. (1945). <span style="font-style:italic;">The psychology of invention in the mathematical field.</span> Princeton University Press.</p>

  <p>Hanf, W. (1974). Nonrecursive tilings of the plane, I. <span style="font-style:italic;">J. Symbolic Logic,</span> 39,283-5.</p>

  <p>Harth, E. (1982). <span style="font-style:italic;">Windows on the mind.</span> Harvester Press, Hassocks, Sussex.</p>

  <p>Hartle, J. B. ve Hawking, S. W. (1983). Wave function of the universe. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> D31, 1777.</p>

  <p>Hawking, S. W. (1975). Partide creation by black holes. <span style="font-style:italic;">Commun. Math. Phys.,</span> 43,199-220.</p>

  <p>Hawking, S. W. (1987). Quantum cosmology. <span style="font-style:italic;">300 years of gravitation</span> (ed. S. W. Hawking ve W. Israel) içinde, Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Hawking, S. W. (1988). <span style="font-style:italic;">A brief history of time.</span> Bantam Press, Londra.</p>

  <p>Hawking, S. W. ve Penrose, B. (1970). The singularities of gravitational collapse and cosmology. <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Roy. Soc. (London),</span> A314,529-48.</p>

  <p>Hebb, D. O. (1954). The problem of consciousness and introspection. <span style="font-style:italic;">Brain mechanisms and consciousness</span> (ed. J. F. Delafresnaye) içinde. Blackwell, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Hecht, S., Shlaer, S. ve Pirenne, M. H. (1941). Energy, quanta and vision. <span style="font-style:italic;">J. of Gen. Physiol.,</span> 25,891-40.</p>

  <p>Herken, B. (ed.) (1988). <span style="font-style:italic;">The universal Turing machine: a half-century survey.</span> Kammerer &amp; Unverzagt, Hamburg.</p>

  <p>Hiley, B. J. ve Peat, F. D. (ed.) (1987). <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum implications. Essays in honour of David Bohm.</span> Boutledge and Kegan Paul, Londra &amp; New York.</p>

  <p>Hodges, A. P. (1983). <span style="font-style:italic;">Alan Turing: the enigma.</span> Burnett Books and Hutchinson, Londra; Simon and Schuster, New York.</p>

  <p>Hofstadter, D. B. (1979). <span style="font-style:italic;">Gödel, Escher, Bach: an eternal golden braid.</span> Harvester Press, Hassocks, Sussex.</p>

  <p>Hofstadter, D. B. (1981). A conversation with Einstein’s brain. <span style="font-style:italic;">The mind’s I</span> (ed. D. R. Hofstadter ve D. C. Dennett) içinde, Basic Books, Inc.; Penguin Books, Ltd., Harmondsworth, Middx.</p>

  <p>Hofstadter, D. E. ve Dennett, D. C. (ed.) (1981). The <span style="font-style:italic;">mind’s I.</span> Basic Books, Inc.; Penguin Books, Ltd., Harmondsworth, Middx.</p>

  <p>Hubel, D. H, (1988). <span style="font-style:italic;">Eye, brain and vision.</span> Scientific American Library Series # 22.</p>

  <p>Huggett, S. A. ve Tod, K. P. (1985). <span style="font-style:italic;">An introduction to tuıistor theory.</span> London Math. Soc. student texts, Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Jaynes, J. (1980). <span style="font-style:italic;">The origin of consciousness in the breakdown ofthe bicameral mind.</span> Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth, Middx.</p>

  <p>Kandel, E. R. (1976). <span style="font-style:italic;">The cellular basis of behaviour.</span> Freeman, San Francisco.</p>

  <p>Kârolyhâzy, F. (19-74). Gravitation and quantum mechanics of macroscopic bodies. <span style="font-style:italic;">Magyar Fizikai Folyoirat,</span> 12, 24.</p>

  <p>Kârolyhâzy, F., Frenkel, A. ve Lukâcs, B. (1986). On the possible role of gravity on the reduction of the wave function. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum concepts in space and time</span> (ed. R. Penrose ve C. J. Isham) içinde, Oxford University Press.</p>

  <p>Keene, R. (1988). Chess: Henceforward. <span style="font-style:italic;">The Spectator,</span> 261 (no. 8371), 52.</p>

  <p>Knuth, D. M. (1981). <span style="font-style:italic;">The art of Computer programming,</span> Cilt 2 (2. baskı). Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.</p>

  <p>Komar, A. B. (1964). Undecidability of macroscopically distinguishable states in quantum field theory. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.,</span> 133B, 542-4.</p>

  <p>Komar, A. B. (1969). Qualitative features of quantized gravitation. <span style="font-style:italic;">Int. J. Theor. Phys.</span> 2, 157-60.</p>

  <p>Kuznetsov, B. G. (1977). <span style="font-style:italic;">Einstein: Leben, Tod, Unsterblichkeit</span> (çev. H. Fuchs). Birkhauser, Basel.</p>

  <p>LeDoux, J. E. (1985). Brain, mind and language. <span style="font-style:italic;">Brain and mind</span> (ed. D.A. Oakley) içinde, Methuen, Londra ve New York.</p>

  <p>Levy, D. W. L. (1984).’ <span style="font-style:italic;">Chess Computer handbook.</span> Batsford.</p>

  <p>Lewis, D. (1969). Lucas against mechanism. <span style="font-style:italic;">Philosophy,</span> 44, 231-3.</p>

  <p>Lewis, D. (1989). Lucas against mechanism II. <span style="font-style:italic;">Can. J. Philos.</span> 9, 373-6.</p>

  <p>Libet, B. (1987). Consciousness: Conscious subjective experience. <span style="font-style:italic;">Encyclopedia of neuro-science,</span> Cilt 1 (ed. G. Adelman) içinde. Birkhauser, s. 271-5.</p>

  <p>Libet, B. (1989). Conscious subjective experience vs. unconscious mental functions: A theory of the cerebral process involved. <span style="font-style:italic;">Models of brain function</span> (ed. R. M. J. Cotterill) içinde, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; s. 35-43.</p>

  <p>Libet, B., Wright, E. W. Jr., Feinstein, B. ve Pearl, D. K. (1979). Subjective referral of the timing for a conscious sensory experience, <span style="font-style:italic;">Brain,</span> 102,193-224.</p>

  <p>Lorenz, K. (1972). <span style="font-style:italic;">From ape to Adam</span> (H. Wendt, Bobbs Merrill) içinde alıntı, Indianapolis.</p>

  <p>Lucas, J. R. (1961). Minds, machines and Gödel. <span style="font-style:italic;">Philosophy,</span> 36, 120-4; yeniden basım Alan Ross Anderson (1964), <span style="font-style:italic;">Minds and machines,</span> Englewood Cliffs.</p>

  <p>MacKay, D. (1987). Divided brains-divided minds? <span style="font-style:italic;">Minduıaves</span> (ed. C. Blakemore ve S. Greenfield) içinde, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Majorana, E. (1932). Atomi orientati in campo magnetico variabile, <span style="font-style:italic;">Nuovo Çimento,</span> 9,43-50.</p>

  <p>Mandelbrot, B. B. (1986). Fractals and the rebirth of iteration theory. <span style="font-style:italic;">The beauty of fractals: images of complex dynamical systems,</span> (H.-O. Peitgen ve P. H. Richter) içinde, Springer-Verlag, Berlin; s. 151-60.</p>

  <p>Mandelbrot, B. B. (1989). Some ‘facts’ that evaporate upon examination. <span style="font-style:italic;">Math. Intelligencer,</span> 11,12-16.</p>

  <p>Maxwell, J. C. (1865). A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field. <span style="font-style:italic;">Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. (Lond.),</span> 155, 459-512.</p>

  <p>Mermin, D. (1985). Is the moon there when nobody looks? Reality and the quantum theory. <span style="font-style:italic;">Physics Today,</span> 38 (no. 4), 38-47.</p>

  <p>Michie, D. (1988). The fifth generation’s unbridged gap. <span style="font-style:italic;">The universal Turing machine: a half-century survey</span> (ed. R. Herken) içinde, Kammerer &amp; Unverzagt, Hamburg.</p>

  <p>Minsky, M. L. (1968). Matter, mind, and models. <span style="font-style:italic;">Semantic information Processing</span> (ed. M. L. Minsky) içinde, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.</p>

  <p>Misner, C. W. (1969). Mixmaster universe, <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev. Lett.,</span> 22,1071-4.</p>

  <p>Moravec, H. (1989). <span style="font-style:italic;">Mind children: the future of robot and human intelligence.</span> Harvard University Press.</p>

  <p>Moruzzi, G. ve Magoun, H. W. (1949). Brainstem reticular formation and activation of the EEG. <span style="font-style:italic;">Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,</span> 1,455-73.</p>

  <p>Mott, N. F. (1929). The wave mechanics of a-ray tracks. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measure-ment</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lond)</span> A126,79-84.</p>

  <p>Mott, N. F. ve Massey, H. S. W. (1965). Magnetic moment of the electron. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek), Princeton University Press, 1983; orijinali <span style="font-style:italic;">The theory of atomic collisions</span> N. F. Mott ve H. S. W. Massey (Clarendon Press, Oxford; 1965).</p>

  <p>Myers, D. (1974). Nonrecursive tilings of the plane, II. <span style="font-style:italic;">J. Symbolic Logic</span> 39,286-94.</p>

  <p>Myers, R. E. ve Sperry, R. W. (1953). Interocular transfer of a visual form discrimination habit in cats after section of the optic chiasm and corpus callosum. <span style="font-style:italic;">Anatomical Record,</span> 175, 351-2.</p>

  <p>Nagel, E. ve Newman, J. R. (1958). <span style="font-style:italic;">Gödel’s proof.</span> Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul Ltd.</p>

  <p>Nelson, D. R. ve Halperin, B. I. (1985). Pentagonal and icosahedral order in rapidly cooled metals. <span style="font-style:italic;">Science,</span> 229,233.</p>

  <p>Newton, I. (1687). <span style="font-style:italic;">Principia.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Newton, I. (1730). <span style="font-style:italic;">Opticks.</span> 1952, Dover, Inc.</p>

  <p>Oakley, D. A. (ed.) (1985). <span style="font-style:italic;">Brain and mind.</span> Methuen, Londra ve New York.</p>

  <p>Oakley, D. A. ve Eames L. C. (1985). The plurality of consciousness. <span style="font-style:italic;">Brain and mind</span> (ed. D. A, Oakley) içinde, Methuen, Londra ve New York.</p>

  <p>O’Connell, K. (1988). Computer chess. <span style="font-style:italic;">Chess,</span> 15</p>

  <p>O’Keefe, J. (1985). Is consciousness the gateway to the hippocampal cognitive map? A speculative essay on the neural basis of mind. <span style="font-style:italic;">Brain and mind</span> (ed. D. A. Oakley) içinde, Methuen, Londra ve New York.</p>

  <p>Onoda, G. Y., Steinhardt, P. J., DiVincenzo, D. P. ve Socolar, J. E. S. (1988). Growing perfect quasicrystals. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev. Lett.,</span> 60, 2688.</p>

  <p>Oppenheimer, J. R. ve Snyder, H. (1939). On continued gravitational contraction. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.</span> 56,455-9.</p>

  <p>Pais, A. (1982). <span style="font-style:italic;">‘Subtle is the Lord...’: the Science and the life of Albert Einstein.</span> Clarendon Press, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Paris, J. ve Harrington. L. (1977). A mathematical incompleteness in Peano arithmetic. <span style="font-style:italic;">Handbook of mathematical logic</span> (ed. J. Banvise) içinde, North-Holland, Amsterdam.</p>

  <p>Pearle, P. (1985). ‘Models for reduction’. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum concepts in space and time</span> (ed. C. J. Isham ve R. Penrose) içinde, Oxford University Press.</p>

  <p>Pearle, P. (1989). Combining stochastic dynamical state-vector reduction with sponta-neous localization. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev.</span> A, 39,2277-89.</p>

  <p>Peitgen, H.-O. ve Richter, P. H. (1986). <span style="font-style:italic;">The beauty of fractals.</span> Springer-Verlag, Berlin and Heidelberg.</p>

  <p>Peitgen, H.-O. ve Saupe, D. (1988). <span style="font-style:italic;">The Science of fractal images.</span> Springer-Verlag, Berlin.</p>

  <p>Penfield, W. ve Jasper, H. (1947). Highest level seizures. <span style="font-style:italic;">Research Publications of the Association for Research in Nervous and Mentol Diseases</span> <span style="font-style:italic;">(New York),</span> 26,252-71.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1965). Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev. Lett.,</span> 14,57-9.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1974). The röle of aesthetics in pure and applied mathematical research. <span style="font-style:italic;">Bull. Inst. Math. Applications,</span> 10, no. 7/8,266-71.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1979a). Einstein’s vision and the mathematics of the natural world. <span style="font-style:italic;">The Sciences</span> (Mart), 6-9.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1979b). Singularities and time-asymmetry. <span style="font-style:italic;">General relativity: An Einstein centenary</span> (ed. S. W. Hawking ve W. Israel) içinde, Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1987a). Newton, quantum theory and reality. <span style="font-style:italic;">300 years of gravity</span> (ed. S. W. Hawking ve W. Israel) içinde, Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1987b). Quantum Physics and Conscious Thought. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum implications: Essays in honour of David Bohm</span> (ed. B. J. Hiley ve F. D. Peat) içinde, Routledge and Kegan Paul, Londra &amp; New York.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1989a). Tilings and quasi-crystals; a non-local growth problem? <span style="font-style:italic;">Aperiodicity and order 2</span> (ed. M. Jarif), Academic Press, New York.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. (1989b). Difficulties with inflationary cosmology. <span style="font-style:italic;">Fourteenth Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics</span> (ed. E. J. Fenyves) içinde, NY Acad. Sci., New York, 571, 249-64.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. ve Rindler, W. (1984). <span style="font-style:italic;">Spinors and space-time,</span> Cilt 1: <span style="font-style:italic;">Two-spinor calculus and relativistic fields.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Penrose, R. ve Rindler, W. (1986). <span style="font-style:italic;">Spinors and space-time,</span> Cilt 2: <span style="font-style:italic;">Spinor and twistor methods in space-time geometry.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Pour-El, M. B. ve Richards, I. (1979). A computable ordinary differential equation which possesses no computable solution. <span style="font-style:italic;">Ann. Math. Logic,</span> 17, 61-90.</p>

  <p>Pour-El, M. B. ve Richards, I. (1981). The wave equation with computable initial data such that its unique solution is not computable. <span style="font-style:italic;">Adv. in Math.,</span> 39, 215-39.</p>

  <p>Pour-El, M. B. ve Richards, I. (1982). Noncomputability in models of physical phenomena. <span style="font-style:italic;">Int. J. Theor. Phys.,</span> 21, 553-5.</p>

  <p>Pour-El, M. B. ve Richards, I. (1989). <span style="font-style:italic;">Computability in analysis and physics.</span> Springer-Verlag, New York.</p>

  <p>Rae, A. (1986). <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum physics: illusion or reality?</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Resnikoff, H. L. ve Wells, R. O. Jr. (1973). <span style="font-style:italic;">Mathematics and civilization.</span> Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, eklemelerle yeni baskı, 1984, Dover Publications, Inc., Mineola, NY.</p>

  <p>Rindler, W. (1977). <span style="font-style:italic;">Essential relativity.</span> Springer-Verlag, New York.</p>

  <p>Rindler, W. (1982). <span style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to special relativity.</span> Clarendon Press, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Robinson, R. M. (1971). Undecidability and nonperiodicity for tilings of the plane. <span style="font-style:italic;">Invent. Math.,</span> 12,177-209.</p>

  <p>Rouse Ball, W. W. (1892). Calculating prodigies. <span style="font-style:italic;">Mathematical recreations and essays</span> içinde.</p>

  <p>Rucker, R. (1984). <span style="font-style:italic;">Infinity and the mind: the Science and philosophy of the infinite.</span> Paladin Books, Granada Publishing Ltd., Londra (ilk baskısı Birkhauser Inc., Boston, Mass., 1982).</p>

  <p>Sachs, R. K. (1962). Gravitational waves in general relativity. VIII. Waves in asymptotically flat space-time. <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Roy. Soc. London,</span> A270,103-26.</p>

  <p>Schank, R. C. ve Abelson, R. P. (1977). <span style="font-style:italic;">Scripts, plans, goals and understanding.</span> Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.</p>

  <p>Schrödinger, E. (1935). Die gegenwârtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. <span style="font-style:italic;">Naturwissenschaften,</span> 23, 807-12, 823-8, 844-9. (çev. J. T. Trimmer) (1980). <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc.,</span> 124, 323-38.) <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983.</p>

  <p>Schrödinger, E. (1967). <span style="font-style:italic;">'What is life?’ and ‘Mind and matter’.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Searle, J. (1980). Minds, brains and programs. <span style="font-style:italic;">The behavioral and brain Sciences,</span> Cilt 3 içinde. Cambridge University Press, yeniden basım <span style="font-style:italic;">The mind’s I</span> (ed. D. R. Hofstadter ve D. C. Dennett) içinde, Basic Books, Inc., Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth, Middx., 1981.</p>

  <p>Searle, J. R. (1987). Minds and brains without programs. <span style="font-style:italic;">Mindwaves</span> (ed. C. Blakemore ve S. Greenfield) içinde, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Shechtman, D., Blech, I., Gratias, D. ve Cahn, J. W. (1984). Metallic phase with long-range orientational order and no translational symmetry. <span style="font-style:italic;">Phys. Rev. Lett.,</span> 53,1951.</p>

  <p>Smith, S. B. (1983). <span style="font-style:italic;">The great mental calculators.</span> Columbia University Press.</p>

  <p>Smorynski, C. (1983). ‘Big’ news from Archimedes to Friedman. <span style="font-style:italic;">Notices Amer. Math. Soc.,</span> 30,251-6.</p>

  <p>Sperry, R. W. (1966). Brain bisection and consciousness. <span style="font-style:italic;">Brain and conscious experience</span> (ed. J. C. Eccles) içinde, Springer, New York.</p>

  <p>Squires, E. (1985). <span style="font-style:italic;">To acknowledge the wonder.</span> Adam Hilger Ltd., Bristol.</p>

  <p>Squires, E. (1986). <span style="font-style:italic;">The mystery of the quantum world.</span> Adam Hilger Ltd., Bristol.</p>

  <p>Tipler, F. J., Clarke, C. J. S. ve Ellis, G. F. R. (1980). Singularities and horizons -a review article. <span style="font-style:italic;">General relativity and gravitation</span> (ed. A. Held) içinde, Cilt 2, s. 97-206. Plenum Press, New York.</p>

  <p>Treiman, S. B., Jackiw, R., Zumino, B. ve Witten, E. (1985). <span style="font-style:italic;">Current algebra and anomalies, Princeton series in physics.</span> Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.</p>

  <p>Turing, A. M. (1937). On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem. <span style="font-style:italic;">Proc. Lond. Math. Soc.</span> (ser. 2), 42,230-65; düzeltme 43,544-6.</p>

  <p>Turing, A. M. (1939). Systems of logic based on ordinals. <span style="font-style:italic;">P. Lond. Math. Soc.,</span> 45,161-228.</p>

  <p>Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing machinery and intelligence. <span style="font-style:italic;">Mind, 59,</span> no. 236; yeniden basım <span style="font-style:italic;">The mind’s I</span> (ed. D. R. Hofstadter ve D. C. Dennett) içinde, Basic Books, Inc,; Penguin Books, Ltd., Harmondsworth, Middx., 1981.</p>

  <p>von Neumann, J. (1955). <span style="font-style:italic;">Mathematical foundations of guantum mechanics.</span> Princeton University Press.</p>

  <p>Waltz, D. L. (1982). Artificial intelligence. <span style="font-style:italic;">Scientific American,</span> 247 (4), 101-22.</p>

  <p>Ward, R. S. ve Wells, R. O. Jr. (1990). <span style="font-style:italic;">Tıvistor geometry and fıeld theory.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Weinberg, S. (1977). <span style="font-style:italic;">The first three minutes: A modern view of the origin of the universe.</span> André Deutsch, Londra.</p>

  <p>Weiskrantz, L. (1987). Neuropsychology and the nature of consciousness. <span style="font-style:italic;">Mindwaves</span> (ed. C. Blakemore ve S. Greenfield) içinde, Blackwell, Oxford.</p>

  <p>Westfall, R. S. (1980). <span style="font-style:italic;">Never at rest.</span> Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Wheeler, J. A. (1983). Law without law. <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, s. 182-213.</p>

  <p>Wheeler, J. A. ve Feynman, R. P. (1945). Interaction with the absorber as the mechanism of radiation. <span style="font-style:italic;">Revs. Mod. Phys.,</span> 17,157-81.</p>

  <p>Wheeler, J. A. ve Zurek, W. H. (ed.) (1983). <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement.</span> Princeton University Press.</p>

  <p>Whittaker, E. T. (1910). <span style="font-style:italic;">The history of the theories of aether and electricity.</span> Longman, Londra.</p>

  <p>Wigner, E. P. (1960). The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics. <span style="font-style:italic;">Commun. Püre Appl. Math.,</span> 13,1-14.</p>

  <p>Wigner, E. P. (1961). Remarks on the mind-body question. <span style="font-style:italic;">The scientist speculates</span> (ed. I. J. Good) içinde, Heinemann, Londra. Yeniden basım E. Wigner (1967), <span style="font-style:italic;">Symmetries and reflections</span> içinde, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, ve <span style="font-style:italic;">Quantum theory and measurement</span> (ed. J. A. Wheeler ve W. H. Zurek) içinde, Princeton University Press, 1983.</p>

  <p>Will, C. M. (1987). Experimental gravitation from Newton’s <span style="font-style:italic;">Principia</span> to Einstein’s general relativity. <span style="font-style:italic;">300 years of gravitation</span> (ed. S. W. Hawking ve W. Israel) içinde, Cambridge University Press.</p>

  <p>Wilson, D. H., Reeves, A. G., Gazzaniga, M. S. ve Culver, C. (1977). Cerebral commissurotomy for the control of intractable seizures. <span style="font-style:italic;">Neurology,</span> 27, 708-15,</p>

  <p>Winograd, T. (1972). Understanding natural language. <span style="font-style:italic;">Cognitive Psychdogy,</span> 3,1-191.</p>

  <p>Wootters, W. K. ve Zurek, W. H. (1982). A single quantum cannot be cloned. <span style="font-style:italic;">Nature,</span> 299,802-3.</p>
</body>
</html>
