<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Anarşist Banker - Şeytanın Saati</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body class="epub-type_chapter" id="chapter3">
  <div class="chapter-begin html5_section">
    <p>We had finished dining. In front of me my friend, the banker, great merchant and remarkable profiteer, was smoking in an unthinking way. Conversation, which had been dying away, lay now dead between us. I tried to call it back to life, in a chance manner, availing myself of an idea that has crossed my meditation. I turned, smiling, to him.</p>

    <p>— Look here: they told me a few days ago that you were once an anarchist.</p>

    <p>— Once isn’t right. I haven’t changed in that respect. I <em>am</em> an anarchist.</p>

    <p>— Good heavens! You an anarchist! How can you be an anarchist? Unless you give the word some meaning which is quite different.</p>

    <p>— From the common one? No, I don’t. I use the word in the usual sense.</p>

    <p>— Do you mean to say then that you are anarchist in exactly the same sense as these trade union chaps are anarchists? So there’s no difference between you and these bomb or strike beggars?</p>

    <p>— Oh, no: there <em>is</em> a difference. Of course there is a difference. But it’s not the sort of difference you might suppose. You suppose, for instance, that my social theories can’t be the same as theirs?</p>

    <p>— Oh, I see. In theory you’re an anarchist; in practice–</p>

    <p>— In practice I’m as much an anarchist as in theory. And in practice I’m much more – oh ever so much more – of an anarchist than those chaps you mentioned. All my life shows it.</p>

    <p>— Eh?</p>

    <p>— All my life shows it, my boy. The fact is, you have never given these things a lucid attention. That’s why you think I’m talking nonsense, or fooling you all the time.</p>

    <p>— But, man, I can’t make head or tail of what you’re saying! Unless – unless you think your life corruptive and antisocial, and think anarchism is that.</p>

    <p>— I’ve told you already that I think nothing of the kind. I mean: I’ve told you that by anarchism I mean only what is usually meant by the word.</p>

    <p>— Alright… I’m still at sea. Look here, man: do you mean to say that there’s no difference between your really anarchistic theories and the practice of your life – the practice of your life as it is now? Do you want me to believe that you have a life exactly like that of the chaps who are commonly called anarchists?</p>

    <p>— No, that’s not the point. What I mean to say is that between my theories and the practice of my life there is no antagonism, but an absolute conformity. I know, of course, that my life doesn’t resemble the life of those bomb and trade union chaps. But it’s <em>their</em> life that is outside anarchism, outside their own ideals. Mine isn’t. In me – yes, in me, the banker, the great merchant, the profiteer, if you like – the theory and the practice of anarchism are joined and both right. You compared me to those bomb and trade union fools just to point out that I am different from them. I am, but the difference is in this: they (yes, they and not I) are anarchists only in theory; I am an anarchist in both theory and practice. They are anarchists and fools, and I am an anarchist and not a fool. That is to say, old man, I am the real anarchist. They – the bomb and trade union men (I was once with them, but I left them exactly because I was really an anarchist) – they are the rubbish of anarchism, the females of the great doctrine of freedom.</p>

    <p>— Good Lord! I’ve never heard anything like that! That’s bewildering! But how do you fit your life – I mean your life as a banker and a businessman – into your anarchist theories? How do you fit it if you say that you mean by anarchist theories exactly what everybody (any common anarchist) means? And you say, on top of all that, that you’re different from them because you’re more anarchist than they are – don’t you?</p>

    <p>— Yes.</p>

    <p>— I can’t understand you at all.</p>

    <p>— But would you like to understand?</p>

    <p>— Of course I would.</p>

    <p>He removed from his mouth the cigar, which had gone out, lit it slowly, stared at the waning match, put it lightly on the ash-tray; then, turning to me his head, which had sunk for a moment, said:</p>

    <p>[…]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
