<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <h1 class="part">NOTLAR</h1>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">Önsöz</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="nonsoz1"><a class="backref" href="../Text/onsoz.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Herrnstein ve Murray, <em>The bell curve,</em> 1994, s. 311.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="nonsoz2"><a class="backref" href="../Text/onsoz.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption,</em> 1998, s. 2.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="nonsoz3"><a class="backref" href="../Text/onsoz.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Fenotip ya da dışyapı: Genetik ve çevresel etkenlerin yarattığı özelliklerin canlının dış görünüşündeki yansıması. Genotip veya soyyapı ise organizmanın genetik yapısıdır —<em>ed. notu.</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="nonsoz4"><a class="backref" href="../Text/onsoz.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Thornhill ve Palmer, <em>A natural history of rape,</em> 2000, s. 176. Alıntı, cinsiyet ayrımcılığı olmasın diye değiştirilmiştir.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="nonsoz5"><a class="backref" href="../Text/onsoz.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Hunt, <em>The new know-nothings: The political foes of the scientific study of human nature,</em> 1999; Jensen, <em>Genetics and education,</em> 1972; Kors ve Silverglate, <em>The shadow university: The betrayal of liberty on America’s campuses,</em> 1998; J. P. Rushton, “The new enemies of evolutionary science”, <em>Liberty,</em> Mart 1998, s. 31-35; “Psychologist Hans Eysenck, Freudian critic, dead at 81”, Associated Press, 8 Eylül 1997.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">I. Kısım</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart11"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part1.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Macnamara, <em>Through the rearview mirror: Historical reflections on psychology,</em> 1999; Passmore, <em>The perfectibility of man,</em> 1970; Stevenson ve Haberman, <em>Ten theories of human nature,</em> 1998; Ward, <em>Religion and human nature,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart12"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part1.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Kitabı Mukaddes sonrası yorumlara göre böyledir; Kitabı Mukaddes zihin ile bedeni açıkça ayırmamıştır.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart13"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part1.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Yaratılış: Opinion Dynamics, 30 Ağustos 1999; mucizeler: Princeton Survey Research Associates, 15 Nisan 2000; melekler: Opinion Dynamics, 5 Aralık 1997; şeytan: Princeton Survey Research Associates, 20 Nisan 2000; ölümden sonrası: Gallup Organization, 1 Nisan 1998; evrim: Opinion Dynamics, 30 Ağustos 1999. Connecticut Üniversitesi Roper Merkezi’nin Kamu Kanaati internet sitesinden ulaşılabilir: <a href="http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu/">www.ropercenter.uconn.edu</a></p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">1 Resmî Kuram</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n011"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Locke, <em>İnsan anlığı üzerine bir deneme,</em> 1690/1947 [2004], II. Kitap, 1. bölüm, s. 26.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n012"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Hacking, <em>The social construction of what?,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n013"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Rousseau, <em>İnsanlar arasındaki eşitsizliğin kaynağı ve temelleri üzerine konuşma,</em> 1755/1994 [2009], s. 61-62.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n014"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Hobbes, <em>Leviathan,</em> 1651/1957 [1993], XIII. Bölüm, s. 185-186 [94].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n015"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Descartes, “Meditations on first philosophy”, VI. Meditation, 1641/1967, s. 177.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n016"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Ryle, <em>The concept of mind,</em> 1949, s. 13-17.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n017"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Descartes, <em>Discourse on method,</em> 1637/2001, V. Kısım, s. 10.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n018"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Ryle, <em>The concept of mind,</em> 1949, s. 20.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n019"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Cohen, “The natural goodness of humanity”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0110"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Rousseau, <em>The first and second discourses</em> 1755/1986, s. 208.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0111"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Rousseau, <em>Emile,</em> 1762/1979, s. 92</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0112"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Aktaran: Sowell, <em>A conflict of visions,</em> 1987, s. 63</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0113"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Orijinali <em>Red Flag</em>’da (Pekin), 1 Haziran 1958; aktaran: Courtois ve diğerleri, <em>The. black book of communism,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0114"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref14">14</a> J. Kalb, “The downtown gospel according to Reverend Billy”, <em>New York Times,</em> 27 Şubat 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0115"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref15">15</a> D. R. Vickery, “And who speaks for our earth?”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 1 Aralık 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0116"><a class="backref" href="../Text/01.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Green, <em>The human embryo research debates</em> …, 2001; R. Mishra, “What can stem cells really do?”, <em>Boston Globe</em>, 21 Agustos 2001.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">2 Oyun Hamuru</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n021"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Degler, <em>In search of human nature: The decline and revival of Darwinism…,</em> 1991; Fox, <em>The search for society…,</em> 1989; Gould, <em>The mismeasure of man,</em> 1981; Richards, <em>Darwin and the emergence of evolutionary theories of mind and behavior,</em> 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n022"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Emma Lazarus’un (1849-1887) “The New Colossus” adlı şiirinden yapılmış bir alıntı; bu şiirin bir bölümü New York’taki özgürlük anıtında bronz bir plaket üzerine yazılıdır. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n023"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991; Fox, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1989; Gould, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1981; Rachels, <em>Created from animals…,</em> 1990; Richards, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987; Ridley, <em>Genom,</em> 2000 [2007].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n024"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991; Gould, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1981; Kevles, <em>In the name of eugenics…,</em> 1985; Richards, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987; Ridley, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000 [2007].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n025"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref5">5</a> <em>Toplumsal inşacılık</em> (social constructionism): Toplumsal fenomenlerin, toplumsal bağlamlarda nasıl geliştiğini irdeleyen sosyolojik bilgi kuramları. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n026"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref6">6</a> “Standard Sosyal Bilim Modeli” terimi ilk olarak John Tooby ve Leda Cosmides tarafından kullanılmıştır: <em>The adapted mind…,</em> 1992. Ron Mallon ve Stephen Stich adlı felsefeciler ise “toplumsal inşa” terimini tercih eder, çünkü hem anlamca yakın hem de kısadır: “The odd couple…”, 2000. “Toplumsal inşa” terimi, sosyolojinin kurucularından biri olan Emile Durkheim tarafından uydurulmuş ve Hacking tarafından analiz edilmiş bir terimdir: <em>The social construction of what?,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n027"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Curti, <em>Human nature in American thought: A history,</em> 1980; Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991; Fox, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1989; Freeman, <em>The fateful hoaxing of Margaret Mead</em> 1999; Richards, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987; Shipman, <em>The evolution of racism,</em> 1994; Tooby ve Cosmides, “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n028"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. viii.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n029"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref9">9</a> White, “The relationships of developmental psychology to social policy”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0210"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Aktaran: Fox, <em>The search for society</em> …, 1989, s. 68.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0211"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref11">11</a> <em>Çağrışımcılık</em> (associationism): Temel sürecin çağrışım olduğu varsayımından yola çıkarak zihinsel ilişkileri açıklamaya çalışan yaklaşım. —<em>ed. notu.</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0212"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> …, 1991, s. 139.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0213"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. 158-159.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0214"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Breland ve Breland, “The misbehavior of organisms”, 1961.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0215"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Skinner, <em>About behaviorism,</em> 1974.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0216"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Skinner, <em>Beyond freedom and dignity,</em> 1971</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0217"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Fodor ve Pylyshyn, “Connectionism and cognitive architecture…”, 1988; Gallistel, <em>The organization of learning,</em> 1990; Pinker ve Mehler, <em>Connections and symbols,</em> 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0218"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Gallistel, “Replacement of general-purpose theories with adaptive specializations”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0219"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Preuss, “The argument from animals to humans in cognitive neuroscience”, 1995 ve “The discovery of cerebral diversity”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0220"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Hirschfeld ve Gelman, <em>Mapping the mind</em> …, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0221"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Ekman ve Davidson, <em>The nature of emotion,</em> 1994; Haidt, “The moral emotions”, 2003.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0222"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Daly, Salmon ve Wilson, “Kinship: The conceptual hole in psychological studies of social cognition and close relationships”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0223"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> …, 1991, s. 148.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0224"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Boas, “Language and thought”, 1911. Örnekler için David Kemmerer’e teşekkür ederim.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0225"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> …, 1991; Fox, <em>The search for society</em> …, 1989; Freeman, <em>The fateful hoaxing of Margaret Mead…,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0226"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. 84.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0227"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref27">27</a> <em>Süperorganizma</em> veya <em>üstorganizma:</em> Birçok organizmanın bir araya gelip oluşturduğu yapı. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0228"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. 95, 96.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0229"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Durkheim, <em>Sosyolojik metodun kuralları,</em> 1895/1962 [1986], s. 103-106.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0230"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Durkheim, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1895/1962 [1986], s. 110.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0231"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. 161.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0232"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Aktaran: Tooby ve Cosmides, “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992, s. 26.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0233"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Üç noktadan önceki bölüm daha eski bir edisyondan alınmıştır; aktaran: Degler, <em>In search of human nature,</em> 1991, s. 209.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0234"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. 209.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0235"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Aktaran: Tooby ve Cosmides, “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992, s. 22.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0236"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. 208.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0237"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> 1991, s. 204.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0238"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991; Shipman, <em>The evolution of racism,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0239"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, Klineberg: s. 188, Ellwood: s. 103-104, Faris: s. 210.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0240"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref40">40</a> <em>Doğuştancılık</em> (innatizm): Zihnin doğuştan düşüncelere ve bilgiye sahip olduğunu, dolayısıyla boş sayfa olmadığını, tüm bilginin deneyimler ve duyulardan gelmediğini söyleyen felsefi öğreti. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0241"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Cowie, <em>What’s within? Nativism reconsidered,</em> 1999; Elman ve diğerleri, <em>Rethinking innateness: A connectionistperspective on development,</em> 1996, s. 390-391.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0242"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991, s. 330.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0243"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref43">43</a> <em>İspritizma:</em> Ruhun ölmediğini, ölülerin ruhlarıyla ilişki kurulabileceğini ve onlardan birtakım bilgiler alınabileceğini savunan inanış. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0244"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Aktaran: Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> 1991: Kroeber, s. 95 ve Lowie: s. 100.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0245"><a class="backref" href="../Text/02.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Charles Singer, <em>A short history of biology,</em> aktaran: Dawkins, <em>Unweaving the rainbow: Science, delusion and the appetite for wonder,</em> 1998, s. 90.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">3 Yıkılacak Son Duvar</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n031"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Wilson, <em>Consilience: The unity of knowledge</em>, 1998. Bu fikir ilk olarak John Tooby ve Leda Cosmides tarafından geliştirilmiştir: “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n032"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Anderson, <em>Cognitive psychology and its implications,</em> 1995; Crevier, <em>AI: The tumultuous history of the search for artificial intelligence,</em> 1993; Gardner, <em>The mind’s new science: A history of the cognitive revolution,</em> 1985; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n033"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Fodor, <em>The elm and the expert: Mentalese and its semantics,</em> 1994; Haugeland, “Semantic engines: An introduction to mind design”, 1981; Newell, “Physical symbol systems”, 1980; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, 2. Bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n034"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Selmer Bringsjord’un yarattığı Brutus. I. S. Bringsjord, “Chess is too easy”, <em>Technology Review,</em> Mart/Nisan 1998, s. 23-28.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n035"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref5">5</a> David Cope yarattığı EMI (Experiments in Musical Intelligence). G. Johnson, “The artist’s angst is all in your head”, <em>New York Times,</em> 16 Kasım 1997, s. 16.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n036"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Harold Cohen’in yarattığı Aaron. G. Johnson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> s. 16.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n037"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Goldenberg, Mazursky ve Solomon, “Creative sparks”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n038"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Leibniz, <em>New essays on human understanding</em>, 1768/1996, II. Kitap, bölüm i, s. 111.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n039"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Leibniz, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1768/1996, önsöz, s. 68.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0310"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Chomsky, <em>Reflections on language,</em> 1975 ve <em>Bilgi Sorunları ve Dil: Managua Dersleri,</em> 1988 [2009]; Fodor, “The present status of the innateness controversy”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0311"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Elman ve diğerleri, <em>Rethinking innateness</em> 1996; Rumelhart ve McClelland, “PDP models and general issues in cognitive science”, 1986.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0312"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Dennett, “The logical geography of computational approaches…”, 1986.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0313"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Chomsky, <em>Reflections on language,</em> 1975; <em>Language and thought,</em> 1993; <em>New horizons in the study of language and mind,</em> 2000. Pinker, <em>The language instinct,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0314"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Ayrıca bkz. Miller, Galanter ve Pribram, <em>Plans and the structure of behavior,</em> 1960; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, 2. bölüm; Pinker, <em>Words and rules: The ingredients of language,</em> 1999, 1. ve 10 bölümler.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0315"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Baker, <em>The atoms of language,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0316"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Shweder, “You’re not sick, you’re just in love: Emotion as an interpretive system”, 1994; tartışma için bkz. Ekman ve Davidson, <em>The nature of emotion,</em> 1994 ve Lazarus, <em>Emotion and adaptation,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0317"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Duygu kuramlarına dair bir derleme için bkz. Lazarus, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0318"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Mallon ve Stich, “The odd couple: The compatibility of social construction and evolutionary psychology”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0319"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Ekman ve Davidson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Lazarus, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0320"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Ekman ve Davidson, <em>The nature of emotion,</em> 1994</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0321"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Fodor, <em>The modularity of mind,</em> 1983; Gardner, <em>Zihin çerçeveleri: Çoklu zekâ kuramı,</em> 1983 [2004]; Hirschfeld ve Gelman, <em>Mapping the mind</em> 1994; Pinker, <em>The language instinct,</em> 1994 ve <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0322"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Elman ve diğerleri, <em>Rethinking innateness</em> 1996; Karmiloff-Smith, <em>Beyond modularity: A developmental perspective on cognitive science,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0323"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Anderson, <em>Cognitive psychology and its implications,</em> 1995; Gazzaniga, Iviy ve Mangun, <em>Cognitive neuroscience: The biology of the mind,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0324"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Calvin, <em>The cerebral code,</em> 1996 ve <em>How brains think,</em> 1996; Calvin ve Ojemann, <em>Inside the brain: Mapping the cortex, exploring the neuron,</em> 2001; Crick, <em>Şaşırtan varsayım</em>, 1994 [2009]; Damasio, <em>Descartes’ın yanılgısı…,</em> 1994 [1999]; Gazzaniga, <em>Cognitive neuroscience: A reader,</em> 2000 ve <em>The new cognitive neurosciences,</em> 2000; Gazzaniga, Iviy ve Mangun, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Kandel, Schwartz ve Jessell, <em>Principles of neural science,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0325"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Çeviren: C. B. Garnett, New York: Macmillan, 1948, s. 664.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0326"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Damasio, <em>Descartes’ın yanılgısı: Duygu, akıl ve insan beyni,</em> 1994 [1999).</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0327"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Damasio, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994 [1999]; Dennett, <em>Consciousness explained,</em> 1991; Gazzaniga, <em>The mind’s past,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0328"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Gazzaniga, <em>Nature’s mind</em> 1992 ve <em>The mind’s past,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0329"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Anderson ve diğerleri, “Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex”, 1999; Blair ve Cipolotti, “Impaired social response reversal: A case of ‘acquired sociopathy’”, 2000; Lykken, <em>The antisocial personalities,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0330"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Monaghan ve Glickman, “Hormones and aggressive behavior”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0331"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Bourgeois, Goldman-Rakic ve Rakic, “Formation, elimination, and stabilization of synapses in the primate cerebral cortex”, 2000; Chalupa, “A comparative perspective on the formation of retinal connections in the mammalian brain”, 2000; Geary ve Huffman, “Brain and cognitive evolution…”, 2002; Katz, Weliky ve Crowley, “Activity and the development of the visual cortex…”, 2000; Rakic, “Setting the stage for cognition…”, 2000 ve “Neurocrationism - Making new cortical maps”, 2001. Ayrıca bkz. 5. Bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0332"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Thompson ve diğerleri, “Genetic influences on brain structure”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0333"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Witelson, Kigar ve Harvey, “The exceptional brain of Albert Einstein”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0334"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref34">34</a> LeVay, <em>The sexual brain,</em> 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0335"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Davidson, Putnam ve Larson, “Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion regulation: A possible prelude to violence”, 2000; Raine ve diğerleri, “Reduced prefrontal gray matter volume and reduced autonomic activity in antisocial personality disorder”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0336"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Bouchard, “Genes, environment, and personality”, 1994; Hamer ve Copeland, <em>Genlerimizle yaşamak,</em> 1998 [2000]; Lykken, <em>The antisocial personalities,</em> 1995; Plomin, <em>Genetics and experience: The interplay between nature and nurture,</em> 1994; Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics,</em> 2001; Ridley, <em>Genom,</em> 2000 [2007].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0337"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Hyman, “Introduction to the complex genetics of mental disorders”, 1999; Plomin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0338"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Bouchard, “Genes, environment, and personality”, 1994 ve “Genetic and environmental influences on intelligence and special mental abilities”, 1998; Damasio, “The lesion method in cognitive neuroscience”, 2000; Lykken ve diğerleri, “Emergenesis: Genetic traits that may not run in families”, 1992; Plomin, <em>Genetics and experience: The interplay between nature and nurture,</em> 1994; Thompson ve diğerleri, “Genetic influences on brain structure”, 2001; Tramo ve diğerleri, “Surface area of human cerebral cortex and its gross morphological subdivisions…”, 1995; Wright, “Double mystery”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0339"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Segal, “Virtual twins: New findings on within-family environmental influences on intelligence”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0340"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Lai ve diğerleri, “A novel forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder”, 2001; Pinker, “Talk of genetics and vice-versa”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0341"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Frangiskakis ve diğerleri, “LIM-Kinase1 hemizygosity implicated in impaired visuospatial constructive cognition”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0342"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Chorney ve diğerleri, “A quantitative trait locus (QTL) associated with cognitive ability in children”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0343"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Benjamin ve diğerleri, “Population and familial association between the D4 dopamine receptor gene and measures of novelty seeking”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0344"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Lesch ve diğerleri, “Association of anxiety-related traits with a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene regulatory region”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0345"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Lai ve diğerleri, “A novel forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder”, 2001; Pinker, “Talk of genetics and vice-versa”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0346"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Charlesworth, “The heritability of fitness”, 1987; Miller, “Sexual selection for indicators of intelligence”, 2000; Mousseau ve Roff, “Natural selection and the heritability of fitness components”, 1987; Tooby ve Cosmides, “On the universality of human nature and the uniqueness of the individual: The role of genetics and adaptation”, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0347"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Bock ve Goode, <em>The genetics of criminal and antisocial behavior,</em> 1996; Lykken, <em>The antisocial personalities,</em> 1995; Mealey, “The sociobiology of sociopathy: An integrated evolutionary model”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0348"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Blair ve Cipolotti, “Impaired social response reversal: A case of ‘acquired sociopathy’”, 2000; Hare, <em>Vicdansızlar: Antisosyal kişilik bozukluğu,</em> 1993 [2006]; Kirwin, <em>The mad, the bad, and the innocent: The criminal mind on trial,</em> 1997; Lykken, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; Mealey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0349"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Anderson ve diğerleri, “Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex”, 1999; Blair ve Cipolotti, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Lalumiere, Harris ve Rice, “Psychopathy and developmental instability”, 2001; Lykken, “The causes and costs of erime and a controversial cure”, 2000; Mealey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; Rice, “Violent offender research and implications for the criminal justice system”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0350"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Barkow, Cosmides ve Tooby, <em>The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture,</em> 1992; Betzig, <em>Human nature: A critical reader,</em> 1997; Buss, <em>Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind,</em> 1999; Cartwright, <em>Evolution and human behavior,</em> 2000; Crawford ve Krebs, <em>Handbook of evolutionary psychology: Ideas, issues, and applications,</em> 1998; Evans ve Zarate, <em>Introducing evolutionary psychology,</em> 1999; Gaulin ve McBurney, <em>Evolutionary psychology,</em> 2000; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997; Pope, <em>The biological bases of human behavior,</em> 2000; Wright, <em>The moral animal: Evolutionary psychology and everyday life,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0351"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Dawkins, “Universal Darwinism”, 1983 ve <em>Kör Saatçi,</em> 1986 [2002]; Gould, <em>Pandanın başparmağı</em> …, 1980 [2010]; Maynard Smith, <em>Evrim kuramı,</em> 1975/1993 [2002]; Ridley, <em>The problems of evolution,</em> 1986; Williams, <em>Adaptation and natural selection</em> 1966.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0352"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref52">52</a> “Megalomanyak gen” metaforu felsefeci Colin McGinn tarafından önerilmiştir.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0353"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Etcoff, <em>Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0354"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Frank, <em>Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions,</em> 1988; Haidt, “The moral emotions”, 2003; Trivers, “The evolution of reciprocal altruism”, 1971.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0355"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Frank, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0356"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref56">56</a> McGuinness, <em>Why our children can’t read,</em> 1997; Pinker, <em>The language instinct,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0357"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref57">57</a> Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991 ve “Human universals and their implications”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0358"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref58">58</a> Baron-Cohen, <em>Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind,</em> 1995; Hirschfeld ve Gelman, <em>Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture,</em> 1994; Spelke, “Initial knowledge: Six suggestions”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0359"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref59">59</a> Boyd ve Silk, <em>How humans evolved,</em> 1996; Calvin ve Bickerton, <em>Lingua ex machina: Reconciling Darwin and Chomsky with the human brain,</em> 2000; Kingdon, <em>Self-made man: Human evolution from Eden to extinction?,</em> 1993; Klein, <em>The human career: Human biological and cultural origins,</em> 1989; Mithen, <em>Aklın tarihöncesi,</em> 1996 [1998].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0360"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref60">60</a> Gallistel, <em>Animal cognition,</em> 1992; Hauser, <em>The evolution of communication,</em> 1996 ve <em>Wild minds: What animals really think,</em> 2000; Trivers, <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0361"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref61">61</a> James, <em>The principles of psychology,</em> 1890/1950, 2. cilt, 24. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0362"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref62">62</a> Freeman, <em>Margaret Mead and Samoa,</em> 1983 ve <em>Fateful hoaxing of Margaret Mead,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0363"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref63">63</a> Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>Demonic males: Apes and the origins of human violence,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0364"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref64">64</a> Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage</em>, 1996, grafik 90. sayfadaki 6.2 numaralı şekilden Ed Hagen tarafından uyarlanmıştır. Ayrıca bkz. Ghiglieri, <em>Erkeğin karanlık yüzü</em>, 1999 [2002]; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0365"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref65">65</a> Ember, “Myths about hunter-gatherers”, 1978. Ayrıca bkz. Ghiglieri, <em>Erkeğin karanlık yüzü</em>, 1999 [2002]; Keeley, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1996; Knauft, “Reconsidering violence in simple human societies”, 1987; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0366"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref66">66</a> Divale, “System population control in the middle and upper Paleolithic: Inferences based on contemporary hunter-gatherers”, 1972. Ayrıca bkz. Eibl-Eibesfeldt, <em>Human ethology</em>, 1989, s. 323.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0367"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref67">67</a> Bamforth, “Indigenous people, indigenous violence…”, 1994; Chagnon, “Chronic problems in understanding tribal violence and warfare”, 1996; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Divale, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1972; Edgerton, <em>Sick societies: Challenging the myth of primitive harmony,</em> 1992; Ember, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1978; Ghiglieri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2002]; Gibbons, “Archaeologists rediscover cannibals”, 1997; Keeley, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1996; Kingdon, <em>Self-made man: Human evolution from Eden to extinction?,</em> 1993; Knauft, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987; Krech, “Genocide in tribal society”, 1994 ve <em>The ecological Indian: Myth and history,</em> 1999; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0368"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref68">68</a> Axelrod, <em>The evolution of cooperation,</em> 1984; Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997; Wright, <em>NonZero: The logic of human destiny,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0369"><a class="backref" href="../Text/03.xhtml#ref69">69</a> Brown, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">4 Kültür Akbabaları</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n041"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref1">1</a> <em>Alef, bet</em> ve <em>gimel:</em> İbrani alfabesinin ilk üç harfi. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n042"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Pinker, <em>Language learnability and language development,</em> 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n043"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Boyer, “Cognitive constraints on cultural representations: Natural ontologies and religious ideas”, 1994; Hirschfeld ve Gelman, <em>Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture,</em> 1994; Norenzayan ve Atran, “Cognitive and emotional processes in the cultural transmission of natural and nonnatural beliefs”, 2003; Schaller ve Crandall, <em>The psychological foundations of culture,</em> 2003; Sperber, “The modularity of thought and the epidemiology of representations”, 1994; Talmy, “The cognitive culture system”, 2000; Tooby ve Cosmides, “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n044"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Adams ve diğerleri, “Humanoid robots: A new kind of tool”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n045"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Tomasello, <em>The cultural origins of human cognition,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n046"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Baron-Cohen, <em>Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind,</em> 1995; Karmiloff-Smith ve diğerleri, “Is there a social module? Language, face processing and Theory of Mind in individuals with Williams syndrome”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n047"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Rapin, “An 8-year-old boy with autism”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n048"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Baldwin, “Infants’ contribution to the achievement of joint reference”, 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n049"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Carpenter, Akhtar ve Tomasello, “Fourteen through eighteen month old infants differentially imitate intentional and accidental actions”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0410"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Meltzoff, “Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old children”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0411"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Pinker, <em>The language instinct,</em> 1994, “Language learnability and language development revisited”, 1996 ve <em>Words and rules…,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0412"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Campbell ve Fairey, “Informational and normative routes to conformity: The effect of faction size as a function of norm extremity and attention to the stimulus”, 1989; Frank, <em>Choosing the right pond: Human behavior and the quest for status,</em> 1985; Kelman, “Compliance, identification and internalization: Three processes of attitude chan ge”, 1958; Latané ve Nida, “Ten years of research on group size and helping”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0413"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Deutsch ve Gerard, “A study of normative and informational social influence upon individual judgment”, 1955.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0414"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Harris, <em>Good to eat: Riddles of food and culture,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0415"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Cronk, <em>That complex whole: Culture and the evolution of human behavior,</em> 1999; Cronk, Chagnon ve Irons, <em>Adaptation and human behavior,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0416"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref16">16</a> <em>Prokrustes:</em> Yunan mitolojisinde hırsızlık yapan, cinayet işleyen ve insanları gererek boylarını yataklarına uydurmaya çalışan, Posedion’un oğlu dev haydut. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0417"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Pinker, <em>Words and rules: The ingredients of language,</em> 1999, 10. Bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0418"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Sperber, “Anthropology and psychology: Towards an epidemiology of representations”, 1985 ve “The modularity of thought and the epidemiology of representations”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0419"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Boyd ve Richerson, <em>Culture and the evolutionary process,</em> 1985; Cavalli-Sforza ve Feldman, <em>Cultural transmission and evolution: A quantitative approach,</em> 1981; Durham, “Interactions of genetic and cultural evolution: Models and examples”, 1982; Lumsden ve Wilson, <em>Genes, mind and culture,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0420"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Cavalli-Sforza, “Genes, people and languages”, 1991; Cavalli-Sforza ve Feldman, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0421"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Toussaint-Samat, <em>History of food,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0422"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0423"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Sowell, <em>Migrations and cultures: A world view,</em> 1996, s. 378.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0424"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Diamond, <em>The third chimpanzee: The evolution and future of the human animal,</em> 1992 ve <em>Seks neden keyiflidir?: İnsanın cinsel evrimi,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0425"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Putnam, “Reductionism and the nature of psychology”, 1973.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0426"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref26">26</a> <em>Etoloji:</em> Hayvan davranışlarını inceleyen zooloji alt dalıdır. Etoloji, özellikle evrim, nöroanatomi ve ekoloji gibi bazı bilim dallarıyla sıkı bir işbirliği içinde yürütülen, laboratuvar ve alan çalışmalarını kapsar. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0427"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Chomsky, <em>Rules and representations,</em> 1980, s. 227; Marr, <em>Vision,</em> 1982; Tinbergen, “Derived activities: Their causation, biological significance, origin, and emancipation during evolution”, 1952.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0428"><a class="backref" href="../Text/04.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Pinker, <em>Words and rules: The ingredients of language,</em> 1999.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">5 Sayfanın Son Direnişi</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n051"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Venter ve diğerleri, “The sequence of the human genome”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n052"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Örneğin bkz. Rose ve Rose, <em>Alas, poor Darwin! Arguments against evolutionary psychology,</em> 2000 kitabına katkı yapanlar.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n053"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref3">3</a> R. McKie, <em>The Guardian,</em> 11 Şubat 2001. Ayrıca bkz. S. J. Gould, “Humbled by the genome’s mysteries”, <em>New York Times,</em> 19 Şubat 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n054"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref4">4</a> E. Pennisi, “The human genome”, 2001, s. 1178-1179.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n055"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref5">5</a> “Gene count”, <em>Science</em>, 295, 2002, s. 29; R. Mishar, “Biotech CEO says map missed much of genome”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 9 Nisan 2001; Wright ve diğerleri, “A draft annotation and overview of the human genome”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n056"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Claverie, “What if there are only 30.000 human genes?”, 2001; Szathmáry, Jordán ve Pál, “Can genes explain biological complexity?”, 2001; Venter ve diğerleri, “The sequence of the human genome”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n057"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Szathmáry, Jordán ve Pál, “Can genes explain biological complexity?”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n058"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Claverie, “What if there are only 30.000 human genes?”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n059"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Venter ve diğerleri, “The sequence of the human genome”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0510"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Evan Eichler, aktaran: G. Vogel, “Objection #2: Why sequence the junk?”, 2001, s. 1184.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0511"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Elman ve diğerleri, <em>Rethinking innateness: A connectionist perspective on development,</em> 1996; McLeod, Plunkett ve Rolls, <em>Introduction to connectionist modeling of cognitive processes,</em> 1998; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, s. 98-111; Rumelhart, McClelland ve PDP Araştırma Grubu, <em>Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition,</em> I. cilt: <em>Foundations</em> ve II. cilt: <em>Psychological and biological model,</em> 1986.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0512"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref12">12</a> <em>Frosted Flakes:</em> Kutusunda kaplan çizimi olan bir mısır gevreği markası. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0513"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Anderson, <em>Rules of the mind,</em> 1993; Fodor ve Pylyshyn, “Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis”, 1988; Hadley, “Systematicity in connectionist language learning”, 1994 ve “Systematicity revisited: Reply to Christiansen and Chater and Niklasson and Van Gelder”, 1994; Hummel ve Holyoak, “Distributed representations of structure: A theory of analogical access and mapping”, 1997; Lachter ve Bever, “The relation between linguistic structure and associative theories of language learning - A constructive critique of some connectionist learning models”, 1988; Marcus, “Rethinking eliminative connectionism”, 1998 ve <em>The algebraic mind: Reflections on connectionism and cognitive science,</em> 2001; McCloskey ve Cohen, “Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem”, 1989; Minsky ve Papert, “Epilogue: The new connectionism”, 1988; Shastri ve Ajjanagadde, “From simple associations to systematic reasoning: A connectionist representation of rules, variables, and dynamic bindings using temporal synchrony”, 1993; Smolensky, “Reply: Constituent structure and explanation in an integrated connectionist/symbolic cognitive architecture”, 1995; Sougne, “Connectionism and the problem of multiple instantiation”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0514"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Berent, Pinker ve Shimron, “Default nominal inflection in Hebrew: Evidence for mental variables”, 1999; Marcus ve diğerleri, “German inflection: The exception that proves the rule”, 1995; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, <em>Words and rules…,</em> 1999 ve “Four decades of rules and associations, or whatever happened to the past tense debate?”, 2001; Pinker ve Prince, “On language and connectionism: Analysis of a Parallel Distributed Processing model of language acquisition”, 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0515"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Pinker, <em>Words and rules</em> 1999. Ayrıca bkz. Clahsen, “Lexical entries and rules of language: A multidisciplinary study of German inflection”, 1999. Marcus, <em>The algebraic mind</em> 2001; Marslen-Wilson ve Tyler, “Rules, representations, and the English past tense”, 1998; Pinker, “Rules of language”, 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0516"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Örnekler için bkz. Marcus ve diğerleri, “German inflection: The exception that proves the rule”, 1995 ve Marcus, <em>The algebraic mind: Reflections on connectionism and cognitive science</em>, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0517"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Hinton ve Nowlan, “How learning can guide evolution”, 1987; Nolfi, Elman ve Parisi, “Learning and evolution in neural networks”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0518"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Örnekler için bkz. Hummel ve Biederman, “Dynamic binding in a neural network for shape recognition”, 1992; Marcus, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001; Shastri, “Advances in SHRUTI: A neurally motivated model of relational knowledge representation and rapid inference using temporal synchrony”, 1999; Smolensky, “Tensor product variable binding and the representation of symbolic structures in connectionist systems”, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0519"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Deacon, <em>The symbolic species: The coevolution of language and the brain,</em> 1997; Elman ve diğerleri, <em>Rethinking innateness: A connectionist perspective on development,</em> 1996; Hardcastle ve Buller, “Evolutionary psychology, meet developmental neurobiology: Against promiscuous modularity”, 2000; Panksepp ve Panksepp, “The seven sins of evolutionary psychology”, 2000; Quartz ve Sejnowski, “The neural basis of cognitive development: A constructivist manifesto”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0520"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Quartz ve Sejnowski, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997, s. 552, 555</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0521"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Maguire ve diğerleri, “Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0522"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref22">22</a> E. K. Miller, “The prefrontal cortex and cognitive control”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0523"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Sadato ve diğerleri, “Activation of the primary visual cortex by Braille reading in blind subjects”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0524"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Neville ve Bavelier, “Specificity and plasticity in neurocognitive development in humans”, 2000; Petitto ve diğerleri, “Speech-like cerebral activity in profoundly deaf people while processing signed language: Implications for the neural basis of all human language”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0525"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Pons ve diğerleri, “Massive cortical reorganization after sensory deafferentation in adult macaques”, 1991; Ramachandran ve Blakeslee, <em>Phantoms in the brain: Probing the mysteries of the human mind.</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0526"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Curtiss, de Bode ve Shields, “Language after hemispherectomy”, 2000; Stromswold, “The cognitive neuroscience of language acquisition”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0527"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Catalano ve Shatz, “Activity-dependent cortical target selection by thalamic axons”, 1998; Crair, Gillespie ve Stryker, “The role of visual experience in the development of columns in cat visual cortex”, 1998; Katz ve Shatz, “Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical circuits”, 1996; Miller, Keller ve Stryker, “Ocular dominance and column development: Analysis and simulation”, 1989.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0528"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Sharma, Angelucci ve Sur, “Induction of visual orientation modules in auditory cortex”, 2000; Sur, “Visual plasticity in the auditory pathway…”, 1988; Sur, Angelucci ve Sharma, “Rewiring cortex…”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0529"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref29">29</a> İlintili savlar için bkz. Geary ve Huffman, “Brain and cognitive evolution: Forms of modularity and functions of mind”, 2002; Katz ve Crowley, “Development of cortical circuits: Lessons from ocular dominance columns”, 2002; Katz ve Shatz, “Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical circuits”, 1996; Katz, Weliky ve Crowley, “Activity and the development of the visual cortex: New perspectives”, 2000; Marcus, “Plasticity and nativism: Towards a resolution of an apparent paradox”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0530"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref30">30</a> R. Restak, “Rewiring” (S. C. Vaughan’ın <em>The talking cure</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi), <em>New York Times Book Review,</em> 22 Haziran 1997, s. 14-15.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0531"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref31">31</a> D. Milmore, “‘Wiring’ the brain for life”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 2 Kasım 1997, s. N5-N8.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0532"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref32">32</a> William Jenkins, aktaran: A. Ellin, “Can ‘neurobics’ do for the brain what aerobics do for the lungs?” <em>New York Times,</em> 3 Ekim 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0533"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Aktaran: A. Ellin, <em>a.g.e., New York Times,</em> 3 Ekim, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0534"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref34">34</a> G. Kolala, “Muddling fact and fiction in policy”, <em>New York Times,</em> 8 Ağustos 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0535"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Bruer, “Education and the brain: A bridge too far”, 1997 ve <em>The myth of the first three years: A new understanding of brain development and life long learning,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0536"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref36">36</a> R. Saltus, “Study shows brain adaptable”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 20 Nisan 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0537"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Van Essen ve Deyoe, “Concurrent processing in the primate visual cortex”, 1995, s. 388.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0538"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Crick ve Koch, “Are we aware of neural activity in primary visual cortex?”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0539"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Bishop, Coudreau ve O’Leary, “Regulation of area identity in the mammalian neocortex by <em>Emx2</em> and <em>Pax6</em>”, 2000; Bourgeois, Goldman-Rakic ve Rakic, “Formation, elimination, and stabilization of synapses in the primate cerebral cortex”, 2000; Chalupa, “A comparative perspective on the formation of retinal connections in the mammalian brain”, 2000; Katz, Weliky ve Crowley, “Activity and the development of the visual cortex: New perspectives”, 2000; Levitt, “Molecular determinants of regionalization of the forebrain and cerebral cortex”, 2000; Miyashita-Lin ve diğerleri, “Early neocortical regionalization in the absence of thalamic innervation”, 1999; Rakic, “Setting the stage for cognition: Genesis of the primate cerebral cortex”, 2000 ve “Neurocrationism - Making new cortical maps”, 2001; Verhage ve diğerleri, “Synaptic assembly of the brain in the absence of neurotransmitter secretion”, 2000; Zhou ve Black, “Development of neural maps: Molecular mechanisms”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0540"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Bkz. Bir önceki notun referansları; ayrıca Geary ve Huffman, “Brain and cognitive evolution: Forms of modularity and functions of mind”, 2002; Krubitzer ve Huffman, “A realization of the neocortex in mammals: Genetic and epigenetic contributions to the phenotype”, 2000; Preuss, “What’s human about the human brain?”, 2000 ve “The discoveiy of cerebral diversity…”, 2001; Tessier-Lavigne ve Goodman, “The molecular biology of axon guidance”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0541"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Normile, “Gene expression differs in man and chimp brains”, 2001, s. 44-45.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0542"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Kaas, “The reorganization of sensory and motor maps after injury in adult mammals”, 2000, s. 224.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0543"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Hardcastle ve Buller, “Evolutionary psychology, meet developmental neurobiology: Against promiscuous modularity”, 2000; Panksepp ve Panksepp, “The seven sins of evolutionary psychology”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0544"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Gu ve Spitzer, “Distinct aspects of neuronal differentiation encoded by frequency of spontaneous Ca2+ transients”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0545"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Catalano ve Shatz, “Activity-dependent cortical target selection by thalamic axons”, 1998; Crair, Gillespie ve Stryker, “The role of visual experience in the development of columns in cat visual cortex”, 1998; Katz ve Shatz, “Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical circuits”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0546"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Catalano ve Shatz, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998; Crair, Gillespie ve Stryker, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998; Katz ve Shatz, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1996; Stryker, “Precise development from imprecise rules”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0547"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Catalano ve Shatz, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998; Stryker, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0548"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Wang ve diğerleri, “Odorant receptors govern the formation of a precise topographic map”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0549"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Brown, <em>Social psychology,</em> 1985; Hamer ve Copeland, <em>The science of desire: The search for the gay gene and the biology of behavior,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0550"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref50">50</a> J. R. Skoyles, 7 Haziran 1999, evrim psikolojisine dair bir e-posta tartışma listesinden.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0551"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Recanzone, “Cerebral cortical plasticity: Perception and skill acquisition”, 2000, s. 245.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0552"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref52">52</a> Van Essen ve Deyoe, “Concurrent processing in the primate visual cortex”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0553"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Kosslyn, <em>Image and brain: The resolution of the imagery debate,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0554"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Kennedy, <em>Drawings in the blind,</em> 1993; Kosslyn, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994, s. 334-335; Zimler ve Keenan, “Imagery in the congenitally blind…”, 1983. Ayrıca bkz. Arditi, Holtzman ve Kosslyn, “Mental imagery and sensory experience in congenital blindness”, 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0555"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Petitto ve diğerleri, “Speech-like cerebral activity in profoundly deaf people while processing signed language: Implications for the neural basis of all human language”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0556"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref56">56</a> Klima ve Bellugi, <em>The signs of language,</em> 1979; Padden ve Perlmutter, “American Sign Language and the architecture of phonological theory”, 1987; Siple ve Fischer, <em>Theoretical issues in sign language research,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0557"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref57">57</a> Cramer ve Sur, “Activity-dependent remodeling of connections in the mammalian visual system”, 1995; Sharma, Angelucci ve Sur, “Induction of visual orientation modules in auditory cortex”, 2000; Sur, “Visual plasticity in the auditory pathway…”, 1988; Sur, Angelucci ve Sharma, “Rewiring cortex…”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0558"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref58">58</a> Sur, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988, s. 44, 45.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0559"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref59">59</a> Bregman, <em>Auditory scene analysis: The perceptual organization of sound,</em> 1990; Bregman ve Pinker, “Auditory streaming and the building of timbre”, 1978; Kubovy, “Concurrent pitch segregation and the theory of indispensable attributes”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0560"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref60">60</a> Hubel, <em>Eye, brain and vision,</em> 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0561"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref61">61</a> Bishop, Coudreau ve O’Leary, “Regulation of area identity in the mammalian neocortex by <em>Emx2</em> and <em>Pax6</em>”, 2000; Bourgeois, Goldman-Rakic ve Rakic, “Formation, elimination, and stabilization of synapses in the primate cerebral cortex”, 2000; Chalupa, “A comparative perspective on the formation of retinal connections in the mammalian brain”, 2000; Geary ve Huffman, “Brain and cognitive evolution: Forms of modularity and functions of mind”, 2002; Katz, Weliky ve Crowley, “Activity and the development of the visual cortex…”, 2000; Krubitzer ve Huffman, “A realization of the neocortex in mammals: Genetic and epigenetic contributions to the phenotype”, 2000; Levitt, “Molecular determinants of regionalization of the forebrain and cerebral cortex”, 2000; Miyashita-Lin ve diğerleri, “Early neocortical regionalization in the absence of thalamic innervation”, 1999; Preuss, “What’s human about the human brain?”, 2000 ve “The discovery of cerebral diversity…”, 2001; Rakic, “Setting the stage for cognition: Genesis of the primate cerebral cortex”, 2000 ve “Neurocrationism - Making new cortical maps”, 2001; Tessier-Lavigne ve Goodman, “The molecular biology of axon guidance”, 1996; Verhage ve diğerleri, “Synaptic assembly of the brain in the absence of neurotransmitter secretion”, 2000; Zhou ve Black, “Development of neural maps: Molecular mechanisms”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0562"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref62">62</a> Katz, Weliky ve Crowley, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000, s. 209.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0563"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref63">63</a> Crowley ve Katz, “Early development of ocular dominance columns”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0564"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref64">64</a> Verhage ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0565"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref65">65</a> Miyashita-Lin ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0566"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref66">66</a> Bishop, Coudreau ve O’Leary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000. Ayrıca bkz. Rakic, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0567"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref67">67</a> <em>Knock-out fareler.</em> Hedeflenen bir genin silindiği fare soyları. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0568"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref68">68</a> Thompson ve diğerleri, “Genetic influences on brain structure”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0569"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref69">69</a> Brugger ve diğerleri, “Beyond re-membering: Phantom sensations of congenitally absent limbs”, 2000; Melzack, “Phantom limbs and the concept of a neuromatrix”, 1990; Melzack ve diğerleri, “Phantom limbs in people with congenital limb deficiency or amputation in early childhood”, 1997; Ramachandran, “Behavioral and magnetoencep-halographic correlates of plasticity in the adult human brain”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0570"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref70">70</a> Curtiss, de Bode ve Shields, “Language after hemispherectomy”, 2000; Stromswold, “The cognitive neuroscience of language acquisition”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0571"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref71">71</a> Aktaran: Stromswold, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0572"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref72">72</a> Farah ve diğerleri, “Early commitment of neural substrates for face recognition”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0573"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref73">73</a> Anderson ve diğerleri, “Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0574"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref74">74</a> Anderson, <em>Language, memory and thought,</em> 1976; Pinker, “Formal models of language learning”, 1979 ve <em>Language leamability and language development,</em> 1984; Quine, “Natural kinds”, 1969.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0575"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref75">75</a> Adams ve diğerleri, “Humanoid robots: A new kind of tool”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0576"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref76">76</a> Tooby ve Cosmides, “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992; Williams, <em>Adaptation and natural selection: A critique of some current evolutionary thought,</em> 1966.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0577"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref77">77</a> Gallistel, “The replacement of general-purpose theories with adaptive specializations”, 2000; Hauser, <em>Wild minds: What animals really think,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0578"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref78">78</a> Barkow, Cosmides ve Tooby, <em>The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture,</em> 1992; Burnham ve Phelan, <em>Mean genes: From sex to money to food: Taming our primal instincts,</em> 2000; Wright, <em>The moral animal: Evolutionary psychology and everyday life,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0579"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref79">79</a> Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0580"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref80">80</a> Hirschfeld ve Gelman, <em>Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture,</em> 1994; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, 5. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0581"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref81">81</a> Baron-Cohen, <em>Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind,</em> 1995; Gopnik, Meltzoff ve Kuhl, <em>The scientist in the crib: Minds, brains, and how children learn,</em> 1999; Hirschfeld ve Gelman, <em>a.g.e,</em> 1994; Leslie, “ToMM, ToBY, and agency: Core architecture and domain specificity”, 1994; Spelke, “Initial knowledge: Six suggestions”, 1995; Spelke ve diğerleri, “Origins of knowledge”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0582"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref82">82</a> Baron-Cohen, <em>Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind,</em> 1995; Fisher ve diğerleri, “Localisation of a gene implicated in a severe speech and language disorder”, 1998; Frangiskakis ve diğerleri, “LIM-Kinasel hemizygosity implicated in impaired visuospatial constructive cognition”, 1996; Hamer ve Copeland, <em>Genlerimizle yaşamak,</em> 1998 [2000]; Lai ve diğerleri, “A novel forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder”, 2001; Rossen ve diğerleri, “Interaction between language and cognition: Evidence from Williams syndrome”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0583"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref83">83</a> Bouchard, “Genes, environment, and personality”, 1994; Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do,</em> 1998; Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics,</em> 2001; Turkheimer, “Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0584"><a class="backref" href="../Text/05.xhtml#ref84">84</a> Caspi, “The child is father of the man: Personality continuities from childhood to adulthood”, 2000; McCrae ve diğerleri, “Nature over nurture: Temperament, personality, and life span development”, 2000.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">6 Politik Görüşlü Bilimciler</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n061"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes</em>, 1984, s. x.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n062"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Jensen, “How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement?”, 1969; Jensen, <em>Genetics and education,</em> 1972.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n063"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Herrnstein, “On challenging an orthodoxy”, 1973.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n064"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Darwin, <em>İnsan ve hayvanlarda duyguların ifadesi,</em> 1872/1998 [2001]; Pinker, “Still relevant after all these years”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n065"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Ekman, “A life’s pursuit”, 1987 ve “Afterword: Universality of emotional expression?”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n066"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Sahlins, <em>The use and abuse of biology: An anthropological critique of sociobiology,</em> 1976, s. 3, x.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n067"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Allen ve diğerleri, “Against ‘sociobiology’”, 1975, s. 43</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n068"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Chorover, <em>From genesis to genocide: The meaning of human nature and the power of behavior control,</em> 1979, s. 108-109.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n069"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Segerstråle, <em>Defenders of the truth: The battle for sociobiology and beyond,</em> 2000; Wilson, <em>Naturalist,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0610"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Wright, <em>The moral animal: Evolutionary psychology and everyday life,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0611"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Trivers ve Newton, “The crash of Flight 90: Doomed by self-deception?”, 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0612"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref12">12</a> <em>Huey Newton</em> (1942-1989): Kara Panter Partisinin kurucularından biri ve aynı zamanda önderi. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0613"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Trivers, “Sociobiology and politics”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0614"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Trivers, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1981, s. 37.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0615"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Gould, “Biological potential vs. Biological determinism”, 1976; <em>The missmeasure of man,</em> 1981 ve “The Diet of Worms and the defenestration of Prague”, 1998. Lewontin, <em>Biology as ideology: The doctrine of DNA,</em> 1992; Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes,</em> 1984; Rose ve Rose, <em>Alas, poor Darwin! Arguments against evolutionary psychology,</em> 2000; Rose, <em>Lifelines: Biology beyond determinism,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0616"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Sırf başlıklarda “belirlenimcilik” kelimesini bulduğumuz yerler: Gould, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1976; Rose, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997; Rose ve the Dialectics of Biology Group, <em>Against biological determinism,</em> 1982; ayrıca <em>Not in our genes</em> (1984) kitabındaki dokuz bölümün dördünde.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0617"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes,</em> 1984, s. 11.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0618"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Dawkins, “Sociobiology: The debate continues” (Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin’in <em>Not in our genes</em> adlı kitabının incelemesi), 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0619"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1984, s. 287.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0620"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Dawkins, <em>Gen Bencildir,</em> 1976/1989 [2007], s. 20 [39], vurgu eklenmiştir.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0621"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Levins ve Lewontin, <em>The dialectical biologist,</em> 1985, s. 88, 128; Lewontin, “The organism as the subject and object of evolution”, 1983, s. 68; Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes,</em> 1984, s. 287. Lewontin, <em>Human diversity</em> (1982) kitabının 18. sayfasında bu alıntıyı “genlerimiz tarafından yönetilir” şeklinde özetlemiştir.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0622"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1984, s. 149.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0623"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref23">23</a> <em>A.g.e.,</em> 1984, s. 260.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0624"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Freeman, <em>The fateful hoaxing of Margaret Mead</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0625"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Turner ve Sponsel’in mektubu için bkz. <a href="chief.anth.uconn.edu/gradstudents/dhume/darknessineldorado">chief.anth.uconn.edu</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0626"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Chagnon, “Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal population”, 1988 ve <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0627"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Neel-Chagnon iddialarıyla ilgili Michigan Üniversitesi Raporu (<a href="www.umich.edu/~urel/darkness.html">www.umich.edu</a>); John J. Miller, “The Fierce People: The wages of anthropological incorrectness”, <em>National Review,</em> 20 Kasım 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0628"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref28">28</a> John Tooby, “Jungle fever: Did two U.S. scientists start a genocidal epidemic in the Amazon, or was The New Yorker duped?” <em>Slate,</em> 24 Ekim 2000; Neel-Chagnon iddialarına dair süregiden soruşturma hakkında Michigan Üniversitesi Raporu: <a href="www.umich.edu/~urel/darkness.html">www.umich.edu</a>); John J. Miller, “The Fierce People: The wages of anthropological incorrectness”, <em>National Review,</em> 20 Kasım 2000; “A statement from Bruce Alberts”, <em>National Academy of Sciences,</em> 9 Kasım 2000, <a href="http://www.nas.org/">www.nas.org</a>; John Tooby, “Preliminary Report”, California Üniversitesi Antropoloji Bölümü, Santa Barbara, 10 Aralık 2000: <a href="http://www.anth.ucsb.edu/ucsbprelimnaiyreport.pdf">www.anth.ucsb.edu</a>, ayrıca bkz. <a href="www.anth.ucsb.edu/chagnon.html">www.anth.ucsb.edu</a>; Lou Maraño, “Darkness in anthropology”, UPI, 20 Ekim 2000; Michael Shermer, “Spin-doctoring the Yanomamö”, <em>Skeptic,</em> 2001; Virgilio Bosh ve sekiz imza daha, “Venezuelan response to Yanomamö book”, <em>Science</em>, 291, 2001, s. 985-986; “The Yanomamö and the 1960s measles epidemic”: J. V. Neel, Jr., K. Hill ve S. L. Katz’dan mektuplar, <em>Science</em>, 292, 8 Haziran 2001, s. 1836-1837; “Yanomamö wars continue”, <em>Science</em>, 295, 4 Ocak 2002, s. 41; <a href="yahoo.com/group/evolutionary-psychology/files/aaa.html">yahoo.com</a>. Kasım 2001. Tierney olayıyla ilgili belgelerin geniş bir koleksiyonu için bkz. <a href="http://www.anth.uconn.edu/gradstudents/dhume/index4.htm">www.anth.uconn.edu</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0629"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Edward Hagen, “Chagnon and Neel saved hundreds of lives”, The Fray, <em>Slate,</em> 8 Aralık 2000: <a href="http://www.anth.uconn.edu/gradstudents/dhume/dark/darkness.0250.html">www.anth.uconn.edu</a>; “The Yanomamö and the 1960s measles epidemic” (S. L. Katz’ın mektubu), <em>Science</em>, 292, 8 Haziran 2001, s. 1837.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0630"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref30">30</a> <em>Pittsburgh Post-Gazette</em> gazetesinde, aktaran: John J. Miller, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 20 Kasım 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0631"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref31">31</a> <em>Aziz Francis de Sales Cemiyeti;</em> XIX. yüzyılda Peder John Bosco tarafından İtalya’da kurulmuş ve sanayi devriminin fakir çocuklarına yardım etme amaçlı dernek. Güney Amerika’ya XIX. yüzyılın son kısmında gelmiştir. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0632"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Chagnon, <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden,</em> 1992, bölümler 5-6.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0633"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Ember, “Myths about hunter-gatherers”, 1978; Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage,</em> 1996; Knauft, “Reconsidering violence in simple human societies”, 1937.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0634"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Tierney, <em>Darkness in El Dorado</em> 2000, s. 178.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0635"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Redmond, <em>Tribal and chiefly warfare in South America,</em> 1994, s. 125; aktaran: John Tooby, <em>Slate,</em> 24 Ekim 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0636"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Sponsel, “The natural history of peace: The positive view of human nature and its potential”, 1996, s. 115, 99, 103.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0637"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Sponsel, “Yanomami: An area of conflict and aggression in the Amazon”, 1998, s. 114.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0638"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Tierney, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000, s. 38.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0639"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Neel, <em>Physician to the gene pool: Genetic lessons and other stories,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0640"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref40">40</a> John J. Miller, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 20 Kasım 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0641"><a class="backref" href="../Text/06.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Tierney, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000, s. xxiv.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">7 Kutsal Üçlü</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n071"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Hunt, <em>The new know-nothings: The political foes of the scientific study of human nature,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n072"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Halpern, Gilbert ve Coren, “PC or not PC? Contemporary challenges to unpopular research findings”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n073"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Gould, “Biological potential vs. Biological determinism”, 1976.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n074"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Lewontin, <em>Biology as ideology: The doctrine of DNA,</em> 1992, s. 123.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n075"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Lewontin, <em>Human diversity,</em> 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n076"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Lewontin, <em>Biology as ideology: The doctrine of DNA,</em> 1992, s. 123.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n077"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Gould, “A time of gifts”, <em>New York Times,</em> 26 Eylül 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n078"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Gould, “The great asymmetry”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n079"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Mealey, “The sociobiology of sociopathy: An integrated evolutionary model”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0710"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Gould, “The Diet of Worms and the defenestration of Prague”, 1998, s. 262.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0711"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Bamforth, “Indigenous people, indigenous violence…”, 1994; Chagnon, “Chronic problems in understanding tribal violence and warfare”, 1996; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Divale, “System population control in the middle and upper Paleolithic: Inferences based on contemporary hunter-gatherers”, 1972; Edgerton, <em>Sick societies: Challenging the myth of primitive harmony,</em> 1992 Ember, “Myths about hunter-gatherers”, 1978; Ghiglieri, <em>Erkeğin karanlık yüzü,</em> 1999 [2002]; Gibbons, “Archaeologists redis cover cannibals”, 1997; Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage,</em> 1996; Kingdon, <em>Self-made man: Human evolution from Eden to extinction?,</em> 1993; Knauft, “Reconsidering violence in simple human societies”, 1987; Krech, “Genocide in tribal society”, 1994 ve <em>The ecological Indian: Myth and history,</em> 1999; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>Demonic males: Apes and the origins of human violence,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0712"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Gould, “The Diet of Worms and the defenestration of Prague”, 1998, s. 262.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0713"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Gould, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, s. 265.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0714"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes,</em> 1984, s. 270.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0715"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Rose, <em>Lifelines: Biology beyond determinism,</em> 1997, s. 7, 309.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0716"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Gould, “Life in a punctuation”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0717"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Aktaran: J. Salamon, “A stark explanation for mankind from an unlikely rebel” (PBS’deki “Evrim” dizisinin eleştirisi), <em>New York Times,</em> 24 Eylül 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0718"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref18">18</a> D. Wald, “Intelligent design meets congressional designers”, <em>Skeptic</em>, 8, 2000, s. 13. Şarkı sözü Bloodhound Gang grubunun “Bad Touch” adlı parçasından.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0719"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Aktaran: D. Falk, “Design or chance?” <em>Boston Globe Magazine</em>, 21 Ekim 2001, s. 14-23, 21. sayfadan alıntı.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0720"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref20">20</a> National Center for Science Education, <a href="http://www.ncseweb.org/pressroom.asp?branch=statement">www.ncseweb.org</a>. Ayrıca bkz. Berra, <em>Evolution and the myth of creationism</em>, 1990; Kitcher, <em>Abusing science: The case against creationism</em>, 1982; Miller, <em>Finding Darwin’s God: A scientist’s search for common ground between God and evolution</em>, 1999; Pennock, <em>Tower of Babel: The evidence against the new creationism</em>, 2000 ve <em>Intelligent design: Creationism and its critics</em>, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0721"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Aktaran: L. Arnhart, M. J. Behe ve W. A. Dembski, “Conservatives, Darwin and design: An exchange”, <em>First Things</em>, 107, Kasım 2000, s. 23-31.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0722"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Behe, <em>Darwin’s black box: The biochemical challenge to evolution,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0723"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Behe, <em>a.g.e</em>., 1996; Crews, “Saving us from Darwin”, 2001; Dorit, “Review of Michael Behe’s <em>Darwin’s black box</em>”, 1997; Miller, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999; Pennock, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001; Ruse, <em>Taking Darwin seriously: A naturalistic approach to philosophy,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0724"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Bailey, “Origin of the specious”, <em>Reason,</em> Temmuz 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0725"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref25">25</a> D. Berlinski, “The deniable Darwin”, <em>Commentary,</em> Haziran 1996. Bkz. R. Bailey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> Temmuz 1997. Papa’nın evrimle ilgili görüşleri için bkz. 11. Bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0726"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref26">26</a> <em>Scopes Davası:</em> 1926 yılında ABD’nin Tennessee eyaletinde yasaya karşı gelip Charles Darwin’in fikirlerini öğreten John Scopes adlı öğretmene açılan dava. Scopes Maymun davası olarak da bilinir. Mahkeme sonucunda Scopes suçlu bulunup para cezasına çarptırılmıştır. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0727"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref27">27</a> 1991 tarihli metnin aktarıldığı yer: Bailey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> Temmuz 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0728"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Aktaran: R. Bailey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> Temmuz 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0729"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Bailey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> Temmuz 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0730"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref30">30</a> L. Kass, “The end of courtship”, <em>Public Interest</em>, 126, Kış 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0731"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref31">31</a> A. Ferguson, “The end of nature and the next man” (F. Fukuyama’nın <em>The great disruption</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi), <em>Weekly Standard</em>, 28 Haziran 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0732"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref32">32</a> A. Ferguson, “How Steven Pinker’s mind works” (S. Pinker’ın <em>How the mind works</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi), <em>Weekly Standard,</em> 12 Ocak 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0733"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Wolfe, “Sony, but your soul just died”, <em>Forbes ASAP,</em> 2 Aralık 1996; Wolfe, <em>Hooking up</em> adlı (2000) kitabında ufak tefek değişikliklerle yeniden basılmıştır. Aynı yerler orijinalinde de çıkartılmıştır.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0734"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Holden, “Darwin’s brush with racism”, 2001, s. 1295. Hüküm HLS 01-2652, Olağan Oturum, 2001, Eş Temsilciler Meclisi Kararı No. 74, Temsilci Broome tarafından.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0735"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Robert Wright, “The accidental creationist”, <em>New Yorker,</em> 13 Aralık 1999. Yaratılışçı Discovery Ensitütüsü, Lewontin’in evrim psikolojisine yaptığı saldırıları 2001 tarihli PBS’nin tv belgeseli “Evrim”i eleştirmek için kullanmıştır: <a href="http://www.reviewevolution.com/">www.reviewevolution.com</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0736"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Rose, “Pre-Copernican sociobiology?”, 1978.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0737"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Wolfe, “Sorry, but your soul just died”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0738"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Gould, “Criminal man revived”, 1976.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0739"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref39">39</a> A. Ferguson, “The end of nature and the next man” (F. Fukuyama’nın <em>The great disruption</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi), <em>Weekly Standard,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0740"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Benzer bir rapor için bkz. Dennett, <em>Darwin’s dangerous idea</em> …, 1995, s. 263.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0741"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref41">41</a> E. Smith, “Look who’s stalking”, New York, 14 Şubat 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0742"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Alcock, “Unpunctuated equilibrium in the <em>Natural History</em> essays of Stephen Jay Gould”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0743"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Örneğin Horgan, “Eugenics revisited”, 1993 ve “The new Social Darwinists”; Allen, “Is a new eugenics afoot?”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0744"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref44">44</a> <em>New Republic,</em> 27 Nisan 1998, s. 33.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0745"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref45">45</a> <em>New York Times,</em> 18 Şubat 2001, Haftalık Bakış, s. 3.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0746"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Tooby ve Cosmides, “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992, s. 49.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0747"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Şempanzeler: Montagu, “The new litany of ‘innate depravity’ or original sin revisited”, 1973, s. 4. IQ’nun kalıtsallığı: Kamin, <em>The science and politics of IQ,</em> 1974; Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes,</em> 1984, s. 116. Cisimleşen IQ: Gould, <em>The mismeasure of man,</em> 1981. Kişilik ve sosyal davranışlar: Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1984, bölüm 9. Cinsiyet farklılıkları: Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1984, s. 156. Barışçı klanlar: Gould, “The Diet of Worms and the defenestration of Prague”, 1998, s. 262.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0748"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Daly, “Natural selection doesn’t have goals, but it is the reason organisms do”, 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0749"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Buss, “Evolutionary psychology: A new paradigm for psychological science”, 1995; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; ve <em>The truth about Cinderella: A Darwinian view of parental love,</em> 1999; Etcoff, <em>Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty,</em> 1999; Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do,</em> 1998; Hrdy, <em>Mother nature: A history of mothers, infants and natural selection,</em> 1999; Ridley, <em>The red queen: Sex and the evolution of human nature,</em> 1993 ve <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997; Symons, <em>The evolution of human sexuality,</em> 1979; Wright, <em>The moral animal: Evolutionary psychology and everyday life,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0750"><a class="backref" href="../Text/07.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics,</em> 2001.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">III. Kısım</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart31"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part3.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Drake, <em>Galileo studies: Personality, tradition and revolution,</em> 1970; Koestler, <em>The sleepwalker: A history of man’s changing vision of the universe,</em> 1959.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart32"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part3.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Galileo, <em>İki büyük dünya sistemi hakkında diyalog,</em> 1632/1967 [2008], s. 58-59.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">8 Eşitsizlik Korkusu</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n081"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Johnson, <em>The Rambler,</em> No. 60.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n082"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Charlesworth, “The heritability of fitness”, 1987; Lewontin, <em>Human diversity,</em> 1982; Miller, “Sexual selection for indicators of intelligence”, 2000; Mousseau ve Roff, “Natural selection and the heritability of fitness components”, 1987; Tooby ve Cosmides, “On the universality of human nature and the uniqueness of the individual: The role of genetics and adaptation”, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n083"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Tooby ve Cosmides, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n084"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Lander ve diğerleri, “İntihal sequencing and analysis of the human genome”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n085"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Bodmer ve Cavalli-Sforza, “Intelligence and race”, 1970.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n086"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Tooby ve Cosmides, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n087"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Patai ve Patai, <em>The myth of the Jewish race,</em> 1989.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n088"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Sowell, <em>Race and culture: A world view,</em> 1994; Sowell, “Ethnicity and IQ”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n089"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Patterson, “For whom the bell curves”, 1995 ve “Taking culture seriously: A framework and an Afro-American illustration”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0810"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Cappon, <em>The Adams-Jefferson letters,</em> 1959, s. 387-392.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0811"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Lincoln-Douglas tartışmalarının yedincisi, 15 Ekim 1858.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0812"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Mayr, <em>Animal species and evolution,</em> 1963, s. 649. Bu savın bir evrim genetikçisi tarafından daha yakın tarihli bir dillendirilişi için bkz. Crow, “Unequal by nature: A geneticist’s perspective on human differences”, 2002.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0813"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Chomsky, “Psychology and ideology”, 1973, s. 362-363. Ayrıca bkz. Segerstråle, <em>Defenders of the truth: The battle for sociobiology and beyond,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0814"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Daha fazla tartışma için bkz. Tribe, “Trial by mathematics: Precision and ritual in the legal process”, 1971.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0815"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref15">15</a> <em>“Driving while black</em>“: Alkollü haldeki sürücüyü kenara çekmek gibi, sürücünün siyah olması halinde polis tarafından kenara çekilmesine yönelik bir şaka. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0816"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref16">16</a> <em>Los Angeles Times</em> anketi, 21 Aralık 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0817"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Nozick, <em>Anarşi, devlet ve ütopya,</em> 1974 [2006].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0818"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Gould, <em>The mismeasure of man,</em> 1981, s. 24-25. Eleştiriler için bkz. Blinkhorn, “Review of S. J. Gould’s <em>The mismeasure of man</em>”, 1982; Davis, “Neo-Lysenkoism, IQ, and the press”, 1983; Jensen, “The debunking of Scientific fossils and straw persons: Review of <em>The mismeasure of man</em>”, 1982; Rushton, “Race, intelligence, and the brain: The errors and omissions of the “revised” edition of S. J. Gould’s <em>The mismeasure of man</em>”, 1996; Samelson, “Intelligence and some of its testers”, 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0819"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Putnam, “Reductionism and the nature of psychology”, 1973, s. 142.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0820"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Bu konuda görüş birliğine varmış açıklamalar için bkz. Neisser ve diğerleri, “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns”, 1996; Snyderman ve Rothman, <em>The IQ controversy: The media and public policy</em>, 1988; Gottfredson, “Mainstream science on intelligence: An editorial with 52 signatories, history, and bibliography”, 1997; ayrıca Andreasen ve diğerleri, “Intelligence and brain structure in normal individuals”, 1993; Caryl, “Early event-related potentials correlate with inspection time and intelligence”, 1994; Deary, <em>Looking down on human intelligence: From psychometrics to the brain</em>, 2000; Haier ve diğerleri, “Intelligence and changes in regional cerebral glucose metabolic rate following learning”, 1992; Reed ve Jensen, “Conduction velocity in a brain nerve pathway of normal adults correlates with intelligence level”, 1992; Thompson ve diğerleri, “Genetic influences on brain structure”, 2001; Van Valen, “Brain size and intelligence in man”, 1974; Willerman ve diğerleri, “In vivo brain size and intelligence”, 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0821"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Moore ve Baldwin, <em>Principia ethica,</em> 1903/1996; Rachels, <em>Created from animals: The moral implications of Darwinism,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0822"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Rawls, <em>A theory of justice,</em> 1976.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0823"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Hayek, <em>The constitution of liberty</em>, 1960/1978.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0824"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Chirot, <em>Modern tyrants,</em> 1994; Courtois ve diğerleri, <em>The black book of communism…,</em> 1999; Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0825"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Horowitz, <em>The deadly ethnic hot,</em> 2001; Sowell, <em>Race and culture: A world view,</em> 1994; Sowell, <em>Migrations and cultures: A world view,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0826"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Lykken ve diğerleri, “Emergenesis: Genetic traits that may not run in families”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0827"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref27">27</a> 1970’lerin sonunda <em>Boston Phoenix</em>’de yayımlanan bu söyleşiden yapılan alıntı belleğe dayanılarak yapılmıştır. İroniktir ki Wald’in oğlu Elijah, tıpkı babası ve biyolog annesi Ruth Hubbard gibi radikal bir bilim yazarı olmuştur.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0828"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> 1991; Kevles, <em>In the name of eugenics: Genetics and the uses of human heredity</em>, 1985; Ridley, <em>Genom</em>, 2000 [2007].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0829"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref29">29</a> <em>Bible Belt:</em> ABD’de evanjelik Protestanların sosyal hayatta egemen olduğu, ülkenin güneydoğu eyaletlerini içine alan bölgeye halk arasında verilen ad. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0830"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Bullock, <em>Hitler and Stalin: Parallel lives,</em> 1991; Chirot, <em>Modern tyrants,</em> 1994; Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003]; Gould, <em>The mismeasure of man,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0831"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Richards, <em>Darwin and the emergence of evolutionary theories of mind and behavior,</em> 1987, s. 533.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0832"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci yüzyılın ahlaki tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003]; Murphy, “Hitler was <em>not</em> an atheist”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0833"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Proctor, <em>The Nazi war on cancer,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0834"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Laubichler, “Frankenstein in the land of <em>Dichter</em> and <em>Denker</em>”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0835"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Marksist soykırımlara dair tartışmalar ve Nazi Soykırımıyla karşılaştırma için bkz. Besançon, “Forgotten communism”, 1998; Bullock, <em>Hitler and Stalin: Parallel lives,</em> 1991; Chandler, <em>Brother number one: A political biography of Pol Pot,</em> 1999; Chirot, <em>Modern tyrants,</em> 1994; Conquest, <em>Reflections on a ravaged century,</em> 2000; Courtois ve diğerleri, <em>The black book of communism…,</em> 1999; Getty, “The future did not work”, 2000; Minogue, “Totalitarianism: Have we seen the last of it?”, 1999; Shatz, “The guilty party”, 1999; Short, <em>Mao Zedong: Bir Yaşam,</em> 1999 [2007].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0836"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Marksizmin entelektüel kökenine dair tartışmalar ve Nazizmin entelektüel kökeniniyle karşılaştırılması için bkz. Berlin, <em>The sense of reality: Studies in ideas and their history,</em> 1996; Besançon, <em>The intellectual origins of Leninism,</em> 1981 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Bullock, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1991; Chirot, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003]; Minogue, <em>Alien powers: The pure theory of ideology,</em> 1985 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999; Scott, <em>Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition failed,</em> 1998; Sowell, <em>Marxism: Philosophy and economics,</em> 1985. İnsan doğasıyla ilgili Marksist kuramına dair tartışmalar için bkz. Archibald, <em>Marx and the missing link: Human nature,</em> 1989; Bauer, <em>The new man in Soviet psychology,</em> 1952; Plamenatz, <em>Man and society: A critical examination of some important social and political theories from Machiavelli to Marx</em>, 1963 ve <em>Karl Marx’s philosophy of man</em> 1975; Singer, <em>A Darwinian left: Politics, evolution and cooperation,</em> 1999; Stevenson ve Haberman, <em>Ten theories of human nature,</em> 1998; Venable, <em>Human nature: The Marxian view,</em> 1945.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0837"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Örneğin bkz. Venable, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1945, s. 3.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0838"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Marx, <em>Felsefenin sefaleti,</em> 1847/1995 [1992], 2. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0839"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Marx ve Engels, <em>Alman ideolojisi,</em> 1846/1963 [1992], kısım I.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0840"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Marx, <em>Ekonomi politiğin eleştirisine katkı,</em> 1859/1979 [1993], önsöz.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0841"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach”, 1845/1989; Marx ve Engels, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1846/1963 [1992].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0842"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Marx, <em>Kapital,</em> 1867/1993 [1975], 1. cilt, s. 10.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0843"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Marx ve Engels, <em>1844 Elyazmaları ekonomi politik ve felsefe,</em> 1844/1988 [1993].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0844"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci yüzyılın ahlaki tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 254.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0845"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Minogue, “Totalitarianism: Have we seen the last of it?”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0846"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 275.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0847"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 297-298.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0848"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Courtois ve diğerleri, <em>The black book of communism…,</em> 1999, s. 620.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0849"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Marx alıntısını aktaran: Stevenson ve Haberman, <em>Ten theories of human nature,</em> 1998, s. 146; Hitler alıntısını aktaran: Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 315.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0850"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Besançon, “Forgotten communism”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0851"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Watson, <em>The idea of liberalism,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0852"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref52">52</a> Tajfel, <em>Human groups and social categories</em>, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0853"><a class="backref" href="../Text/08.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Aslı <em>Kızıl Bayrak</em> (Pekin), 1 Haziran 1958; Aktaran: Courtois ve diğerleri, <em>The black book of communism</em> 1999.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">9 Kusurlu Olma Korkusu</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n091"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref1">1</a> <em>The Prelude,</em> VI. Kitap, “Cambridge and the Alps”, I. 1799-1805 arasında yayımlandı.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n092"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Passmore, <em>The perfectibility of man,</em> 1970, epigraf.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n093"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref3">3</a> <em>Valkiri</em>: Kuzey mitolojisinde, evrenin hakimi olan Odin’in bakireleri; savaşta ölecek kahramanları belirler ve onları Valhalla’ya götürürler. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n094"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Örneğin Şiddet Üzerine Seville Bildirisi, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n095"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref5">5</a> “Study says rape has its roots in evolution”, <em>Boston Herald,</em> 11 Ocak 2000, s. 3.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n096"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Thornhill ve Palmer, “Rape and evolution: A reply to our critics”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n097"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Brownmiller ve Merhof, “A feminist response to rape as an adaptation in men”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n098"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Gould, “Ordering nature by budding and full-breasted sexuality”, 1995, s. 433.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n099"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Şey, bu neredeyse doğrudur. Karikatürist Jim Johnson, morslara iftira atmış olabileceğini söyledi bana, çünkü daha sonra penguenleri eğlence olsun diye öldüren hayvanın leopar foku olduğunu öğrenmiş.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0910"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Williams, “Huxley’s evolution and ethics in sociobiological perspective”, 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0911"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Jones, “Sex, culture and the biology of rape: Toward explanation and prevention”, 1999; Williams, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0912"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Williams, <em>Adaptation and natural selection…,</em> 1966, s. 255.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0913"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref13">13</a> İnsan doğası ve ahlak için geçerliliği üzerine bkz. McGinn, <em>Evil, ethics and fiction,</em> 1997; Petrinovich, <em>Human evolution, reproduction and morality</em>, 1995; Rachels, <em>Created from animals: The moral implications of Darwinism</em>, 1990; Richards, <em>Darwin and the emergence of evolutionary theories of mind and behavior</em>, 1987; Singer, <em>The expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology</em>, 1981; Wilson, <em>The moral sense</em>, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0914"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Masters, <em>The nature of politics</em>, 1989, s. 240.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0915"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide</em>, 1988 ve <em>The truth about Cinderella: A Darwinian view of parental love</em>, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0916"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Jones, “Evolutionary analysis in law: An introduction and application to child abuse”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0917"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999, s. 58-66.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0918"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Maynard Smith ve Szathmáry, <em>The major transitions in evolution</em>, 1997; Wright, <em>NonZero: The logic of human destiny</em>, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0919"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref19">19</a> de Waal, <em>Chimpanzee politics: Pouter and sex among the apes,</em> 1998; Fry, “Conflict management in cross-cultural perspective”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0920"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Axelrod, <em>The evolution of cooperation,</em> 1984; Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991; Fry, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997; Wright, <em>NonZero: The logic of human destiny,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0921"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Folk şarkıcısı Philip David Ochs’un “There but for Fortune” şarkısından. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0922"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Singer, <em>The expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0923"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Skinner, <em>Walden Two,</em> 1948/1976; <em>Beyond freedom and dignity,</em> 1971; <em>About behaviorism,</em> 1974.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0924"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Chomsky, “Psychology and ideology”, 1973.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0925"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Berlin, <em>The sense of reality: Studies in ideas and their history,</em> 1996; Chirot, <em>Modern tyrants,</em> 1994; Conquest, <em>Reflections on a ravaged century,</em> 2000; Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003]; Minogue, <em>Alien powers: The pure theory of ideology,</em> 1985 ve “Totalitarianism: Have we seen the last of it?”, 1999; Scott, <em>Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition failed,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0926"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Scott, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0927"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Aktaran: Scott, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, s. 114-115.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0928"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Perry, “Incubated in terror: Neurobiological factors in the ‘cycle of violence’”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0929"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0930"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Betty Friedan ile yapılan bir söyleşiden: <em>Saturday Review,</em> 14 Haziran 1975, s. 18, aktaran: Sommers, <em>Who stole feminism?,</em> 1994, s. 18.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0931"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Aktaran: Elizabeth Powers, <em>Commentary,</em> 1 Ocak 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0932"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Cornell Üniversitesi, Emek ve Kadın Enstitüsü’nde yapılan bir konuşmadan, aktaran: C. Young, “The mommy wars”, <em>Reason,</em> Haziran 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0933"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Liza Mundy, “The New Critics”, <em>Lingua Franca</em>, 3, Eylül/Ekim 1993, s. 27.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0934"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref34">34</a> “From Carol Gilligan’s chair”, Michael Norman söyleşisi, <em>New York Times Magazine,</em> 7 Kasım 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0935"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Bruce Bodner’dan mektup, <em>New York Times Magazine,</em> 30 Kasım 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n0936"><a class="backref" href="../Text/09.xhtml#ref36">36</a> C. Young, “Where the boys are”, <em>Reason,</em> 2 Şubat 2001.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">10 Belirlenimcilik Korkusu</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n101"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Kaplan, <em>Criminal justice: Introductory cases and materials,</em> 1973, s. 10.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n102"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref2">2</a> E. Felsenthal, “Man’s genes made him kill, his lawyers claim”, <em>Wall Street Journal,</em> 15 Kasım 1994. Bu savunma başarısız olmuştur, bkz. “Mobley versus The State”, Georgia Yüce Divanı, 17 Mart 1995, 265 Ga. 292, 455 S.E.2d61.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n103"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref3">3</a> “Lawyers may use genetics study in rape defense”, <em>National Post</em> (Kanada), 22 Ocak 2000, s. A8.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n104"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Jones, “Reconsidering rape”, 2000; Jones, “Sex, culture, and the biology of rape: Toward explanation and prevention”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n105"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Dennett, <em>Elbow room</em> 1984. Ayrıca bkz. Kane, <em>The significance of free will,</em> 1998; Nozick, <em>Philosophical explanations,</em> 1981, s. 317-362; Ridley, <em>Genom,</em> 2000 [2007]; Staddon, “On responsibility in science and law”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n106"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Ceza sanığının biyolojik bir etkene dayanılarak savunulması. 1979’da bir davada Dan White adlı cinayet sanığının savunması, Twinkie adlı abur cuburdan aşırı miktarda tüketip vücuduna yüksek miktarda şeker alması üzerinden yapılmıştı. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n107"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Dershowitz, <em>The abuse excuse,</em> 1994; J. Ellement, “Alleged con man’s defense: ‘Different’ mores”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 25 Şubat 1999; N. Hall, “Metis woman avoids jail term for killing her husband”, <em>National Post</em> (Kanada), 20 Ocak 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n108"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref8">8</a> B. English, “David Lisak seeks out a dialogue with murderers”, <em>Boston Globe</em>, 27 Temmuz 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n109"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref9">9</a> M. Williams, “Social work in the city: Rewards and risks”, <em>New York Times,</em> 30 Temmuz 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1010"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref10">10</a> S. Morse, C. Sandford’un <em>Springsteen point blank</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 19 Kasım 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1011"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref11">11</a> M. Udovich, M. Meade’ın <em>The unruly life of Woody Allen</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi, <em>New York Times,</em> 5 Mart 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1012"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref12">12</a> L. Franks, Hillary Clinton ile söyleşi, <em>Talk,</em> Ağustos 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1013"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref13">13</a> K. Q. Seelye, “Clintons try to quell debate over interview”, <em>New York Times,</em> 5 Ağustos 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1014"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Dennett, <em>Elbow room…,</em> 1984; Kane, <em>The significance of free will,</em> 1998; Nozick, <em>Philosophical explanations,</em> 1981, s. 317-362; Ridley, <em>Genom,</em> 2000 [2007]; Staddon, “On responsibility in science and law”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1015"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Aktaran: Kaplan, <em>Criminal justice: Introductory cases and materials,</em> 1973, s. 16.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1016"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Frank, <em>Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions,</em> 1988; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997; Schelling, <em>The strategy of conflict,</em> 1960.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1017"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Aktaran: Kaplan, <em>Criminal justice: Introductory cases and materials,</em> 1973, s. 29.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1018"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988, s. 256.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1019"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Dershowitz, <em>The abuse excuse,</em> 1994; Faigman, <em>Legal alchemy: The use and misuse of science in the law,</em> 1999; Kaplan, <em>Criminal justice: Introductory cases and materials,</em> 1973; Kirwin, <em>The mad, the bad, and the innocent: The criminal mind on trial,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1020"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref20">20</a> <em>Durham hükmü:</em> 1954 yılında ABD mahkemesi, suçlanan kişinin akıl sağlığı yerinde değilse mahkûm edilemeyeceği kararını vermişti. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1021"><a class="backref" href="../Text/10.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Rice, “Violent offender research and implications for the criminal justice system”, 1997.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">11 Nihilizm Korkusu</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n111"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref1">1</a> <em>Potemkin:</em> Çariçe II. Katerina’nın gücü ele geçirmesine yardım eden Prens Potemkin, 1787 tarihli Kırım ziyareti sırasında çariçesini etkilemek ve etraftaki sefaleti görmesini engellemek için sadece dekorlardan oluşan taklit köyler kurulması emrini vermişti; Potemkin köyü deyişi, etkileyici görünen fakat içi boş olan şeyleri nitelemek için kullanılan bir ifadedir. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n112"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref2">2</a> 22 Ekim 1996; <em>L’Osservatore Romana</em>’nın İngilizce versiyonunda 30 Ekim 1996’da yeniden basılmıştır.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n113"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Macnamara, <em>Through the rearview mirror: Historical reflections on psychology,</em> 1999; Miller, <em>Finding Darwin’s God: A scientist’s search for common ground between God and evolution,</em> 1999; Newsome, “Life of faith, life of science”, 2001; Ruse, <em>Can a Darwinian be a Christian? The relationship between science and religion,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n114"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Bkz. Nagel, <em>The possibility of altruism</em>, 1970; Singer, <em>The expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology</em>, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n115"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Cummins, “Evidence for the innateness of deontic reasoning”, 1996; Trivers, “The evolution of reciprocal altruism”, 1971; Wright, <em>The moral animal: Evolutionary psychology and everyday life</em>, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n116"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Zahn-Wexler ve digerleri, “Development of concern for others”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n117"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n118"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Hare, <em>Vicdansızlar: Antisosyal kişilik bozukluğu,</em> 1993 [2006]; Lykken, <em>The antisocial personalities,</em> 1995; Mealey, “The sociobiology of sociopathy: An integrated evolutionary model”, 1995; Rice, “Violent offender research and implications for the criminal justice system”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n119"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Rachels, <em>Created from animals: The moral implications of Darwinism,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1110"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Murphy,“Hitler was <em>not</em> an atheist”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1111"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Damewood, “Ethical implications of a new application of preimplantation diagnosis”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1112"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref12">12</a> <em>Susan Smith</em>: İki oğlunu öldürmekten suçlu bulunup 1995 yılında ömür boyu hapse mahkûm edilen Amerikalı kadın. Çocuklardan biri üç yaşındaydı, öbürü on dört aylıktı. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1113"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Ron Rosenbaum, “Staring into the heart of darkness”, <em>New York Times Magazine</em>, 4 Haziran 1995; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide</em>, 1988, s. 79.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1114"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Charles Dickens’ın <em>Bir Yılbaşı Hikâyesi</em> adlı eserinden. Scrooge’un iş ortağı olan Marley öldükten sonra, hayaleti Scrooge’u ziyaret etmeye gelir. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1115"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Antonaccio ve Schweiker, <em>Iris Murdoch and the search for human goodness</em>, 1996; Brink, <em>Moral realism and the foundations of ethics</em>, 1989; Murdoch, <em>Metaphysics as a guide to morals</em>, 1993; Nozick, <em>Philosophical explanations</em>, 1981; Sayre-McCord, <em>Essays on moral realism</em>, 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1116"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Hillel: Yahudi tarihindeki en önemli dinsel önderlerden birisidir. Kral Herod ve İmparator Augustus zamanında Kudüs’te yaşamıştır. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1117"><a class="backref" href="../Text/11.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Singer, <em>The expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology,</em> 1981.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">IV. Kısım</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart41"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part4.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Alexander, 1987, <em>The biology of moral systems,</em> s. 40.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">12 Gerçeklikle Temas Etmek</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n121"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Aktaran: Cartmill, “Oppressed by evolution”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n122"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Shepard, <em>Mind sights: Original visual illusions, ambiguities, and other anomalies</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n123"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref3">3</a> <a href="www-bcs.mit.edu/persci/high/gallery/heckershadowillusion.html">www-bcs.mit.edu</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n124"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref4">4</a> <a href="www-bcs.mit.edu/persci/high/gallery/heckershadowillusion.html">www-bcs.mit.edu</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n125"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Bilgisayar bilimcisi Oliver Selfridge’ten; aktaran: Neisser, <em>Cognitive psychology,</em> 1967.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n126"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n127"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Brown, <em>Social psychology,</em> 1985; Lee, Jussim ve McCauley, <em>Stereotype accuracy: Toward appreciating group differences,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n128"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref8">8</a> “Phony science wars” (Ian Hacking’in <em>The social construction of what?</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi), <em>Atlantic Monthly,</em> Kasım 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n129"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Hacking, <em>The social construction of what?,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1210"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Searle, <em>Toplumsal gerçekliğin inşası,</em> 1995 [2005].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1211"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Anderson, <em>The adaptive character of thought,</em> 1990; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, bölümler 2, 5 ve <em>Words and rules…,</em> 1999, 10. bölüm; Pinker ve Prince, “The nature of human concepts: Evidence from an unusual source”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1212"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Armstrong, Gleitman ve Gleitman, “What some concepts might not be”, 1983; Erikson ve Kruschke, “Rules and exemplars in category learning”, 1998; Marcus, <em>The algebraic mind: Reflections on connectionism and cognitive science,</em> 2001; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, bölümler 2, 5 ve <em>Words and rules…,</em> 1999, 3. bölüm; Sloman, “The empirical case for two systems of reasoning”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1213"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Ahn ve diğerleri, “Why essences are essential in the psychology of concepts”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1214"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Lee, Jussim ve McCauley, <em>Stereotype accuracy: Toward appreciating group differences,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1215"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref15">15</a> McCauley, “Are streotypes exaggerated? A sampling of racial, gender, academic, occupational, and political stereotypes”, 1995; Swim, “Perceived versus meta-analytic effect sizes: An assessment of the accuracy of gender stereotypes”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1216"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Jussim, McCauley ve Lee, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; McCauley, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1217"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Jussim ve Eccles, “Are teacher expectations biased by students’ gender, social class, or ethnicity?”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1218"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Brown, <em>Social psychology,</em> 1985; Jussim, McCauley ve Lee, “Why study Stereotype accuracy and inaccuracy?”, 1995; McCauley, “Are streotypes exaggerated? A sampling of racial, gender, academic, occupational, and political stereotypes”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1219"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Gilbert ve Hixon, “The trouble of thinking: Activation and application of stereotypic beliefs”, 1991; Pratto ve Bargh, “Stereotyping based on apparently individuating Information: Trait and global components of sex stereotypes under attention overload”, 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1220"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Brown, <em>Social psychology,</em> 1985, s. 595.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1221"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Jussim ve Eccles, “Are teacher expectations biased by students’ gender, social class, or ethnicity?”, 1995; Smith, Jussim ve Eccles, “Do self-fulfilling prophesies accumulate, dissipate, or remain stable over time?”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1222"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Flynn, “Searching for justice: The discovery of IQ gains over time”, 1999; Loury, <em>The anatomy of racial inequality: Stereotypes, stigma, and the elusive quest for racial justice in the United States,</em> 2002; Valian, <em>Why so slow? The advancement of women,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1223"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Galileo, <em>İki büyük dünya sistemi hakkında diyalog,</em> 1632/1967 [2008], s. 105.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1224"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Whorf, <em>Language, thought, and reality: Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf,</em> 1956.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1225"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Geertz, <em>The interpretation of cultures,</em> 1973, s. 45.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1226"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Aktaran: Lehman, <em>Signs of the times: Deconstructionism and the fall of Paul de Man,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1227"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Barthes, “To write: An intransitive verb?”, 1972, s. 135.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1228"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Pinker, <em>The language instinct,</em> 1994, 3. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1229"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Pinker, <em>Language learnability and language development,</em> 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1230"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref30">30</a> <em>Metonim:</em> Kendi anlamı dışında başka bir kavramı çağrıştıran kelime; örneğin Ankara, Türkiye hükümetinin metonimidir. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1231"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Lakoff ve Johnson, <em>Metaforlar: Hayat, anlam ve dil,</em> 1980 [2005].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1232"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Jackendoff, “How language helps us think”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1233"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Baddeley, <em>Working memory,</em> 1986.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1234"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Dehaene ve diğerleri, “Sources of mathematical thinking: Behavioral and brainimaging evidence”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1235"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Pinker, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994, 3. bölüm; Siegal, Varley ve Want, “Mind over grammar: Reasoning in aphasia and development”, 2001; Weiskrantz, <em>Thought without language,</em> 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1236"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Gallistel, <em>Animal cognition,</em> 1992; Gopnik, Meltzoff ve Kuhl, <em>The scientist in the crib: Minds, brains, and how children learn,</em> 1999; Hauser, <em>Wild minds: What animals really think,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1237"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Anderson, <em>The architecture of cognition,</em> 1983.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1238"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Pinker, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1239"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref39">39</a> <em>Edebikelam</em> (euphemism): Söylenmesi çirkin ya da sakıncalı görülen nesne ve kavramların başka kelimelerle daha uygun ve edepli anlatılması; örtmece. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1240"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref40">40</a> “‘Minority’ a bad word in San Diego”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 4 Nisan 2001; S. Schweitzer, “Council mulls another word for ‘minority’”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 9 Ağustos 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1241"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Brooker, <em>A concise glossary of cultural theory,</em> 1999, s. 115-116.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1242"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Leslie, “Pretending and believing: Issues in the theory of ToMM”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1243"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Abbott, “Imagination and the adapted mind…”, 2001; Leslie, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1244"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Frith, <em>The cognitive neuropsychology of schizophrenia,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1245"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Kosslyn, <em>Image and mind,</em> 1980 ve <em>Image and brain: The resolution of the imagery debate,</em> 1994; Pinker, “Visual cognition: An introduction”, 1984b; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, 4. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1246"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Kosslyn, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1980; Pinker, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997, 5. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1247"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Chase ve Simon, “Perception in chess”, 1973.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1248"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Dennett, <em>Consciousness explained</em>, 1991, s. 56-57.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1249"><a class="backref" href="../Text/12.xhtml#ref49">49</a> A. Gopnik, “Black studies”, <em>New Yorker</em>, 5 Aralık 1994, s. 138-139.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">13 Çaresizliklerimiz</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n131"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Caramazza ve Shelton, “Domain-specific knowledge systems in the brain: The animate-inanimate distinction”, 1998; Gallistel, “The replacement of general-purpose theories with adaptive specializations”, 2000; Gardner, <em>Zihin çerçeveleri: Çoklu zekâ kuramı</em>, 1983 [2004]; Hirschfeld ve Gelman, <em>Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture,</em> 1994; Keil, <em>Concepts, kinds and cognitive development,</em> 1989; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, 5. bölüm; Tooby ve Cosmides, “Psychological foundations of culture”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n132"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Spelke, “Initial knowledge: Six suggestions”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n133"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Atran, “Causal constraints on categories and categorical constraints on biological reasoning across cultures”, 1995 ve “Folk biology and the anthropology of science: Cognitive universals and cultural particulars”, 1998; Gelman, Coley ve Gottfried, “Essentialist beliefs in children: The acquisition of concepts and theories”, 1994; Keil, “The growth of casual understandings of natural kinds”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n134"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Bloom, “Intention, history, and artifact concepts”, 1996; Keil, <em>Concepts, kinds and cognitive development,</em> 1989.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n135"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Gallistel, <em>The organization of learning,</em> 1990; Kosslyn, <em>Image and brain: The resolution of the imagery debate,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n136"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Butterworth, <em>The mathematical brain,</em> 1999; Dehaene, <em>The number sense: How the mind creates mathematics,</em> 1997; Devlin, <em>The math gene: How mathematical thinking evolved and why numbers are like gossip,</em> 2000; Geary, <em>Children’s mathematical development,</em> 1994; Lakoff ve Nunez, <em>Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind brings mathematics into being,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n137"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Cosmides ve Tooby, “Are humans good intuitive statisticians after all? Rethinking some conclusions from the literature on judgment under uncertainty”, 1996; Gigerenzer, “Ecological intelligence: An adaptation for frequencies”, 1997; Kahneman ve Tversky, “On the study of statistical intuitions”, 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n138"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Braine, “Mental logic and how to discover it”, 1994; Jackendoff, <em>Semantic structures,</em> 1990; Macnamara ve Reyes, <em>The logical foundations of cognition,</em> 1994; Pinker, <em>Learnability and cognition</em> …, 1989.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n139"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Pinker, <em>The language instinct,</em> 1994 ve <em>Words and rules…,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1310"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Aktaran: Ravitch, <em>Left back: A century of failed school reforms,</em> 2000, s. 388.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1311"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref11">11</a> McGuinness, <em>Why our children can’t read,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1312"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Geary, <em>Children’s mathematical development,</em> 1994 ve “Reflections on evolution and culture in children’s cognition”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1313"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Carey, “Cognitive science and science education”, 1986; Carey ve Spelke, “Domain-specific knowledge and conceptual change”, 1994; Gardner, <em>Zihin çerçeveleri: Çoklu zekâ kuramı,</em> 1983 [2004] ve <em>Intelligence reframed…,</em> 1999; Geary, <em>Children’s mathematical development,</em> 1994, “Reflections on evolution and culture in children’s cognition”, 1995 ve “Principles of evolutionary educational psychology”, 2002.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1314"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Carey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1986; McCloskey, “Intuitive physics”, 1983.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1315"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Gardner, <em>Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 21st century,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1316"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref16">16</a> McGuinness, <em>Why our children can’t read,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1317"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Dehaene ve diğerleri, “Sources of mathematical thinking: Behavioral and brainimaging evidence”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1318"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Bloom, “Generativity within language and other cognitive domains”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1319"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Pinker, “A theory of graph comprehension”, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1320"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Carey ve Spelke, “Domain-specific knowledge and conceptual change”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1321"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Geary, “Reflections on evolution and culture in children’s cognition”, 1995 ve “Principles of evolutionary educational psychology”, 2002; Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1322"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Green, <em>The human embryo research debates</em> 2001, 2. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1323"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref23">23</a> <em>Kimera:</em> Yunan mitolojisinde aslan kafalı, keçi bedenli, yılan kuyruklu yaratık. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1324"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref24">24</a> S. G. Stolberg, “Reconsidering embryo research”, <em>New York Times</em>, 1 Temmuz 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1325"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Brock, <em>Life and death: Philosophical essays in biomedical ethics,</em> 1993, s. 372, n. 14 s. 385; Glover, <em>Causing death and saving lives,</em> 1977; Tooley, “Abortion and infanticide”, 1972; Warren, “On the moral and legal status of abortion”, 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1326"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Green, <em>The human embryo research debates</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1327"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref27">27</a> R. Bailey, “Dr. Strangelunch, or: Why we should learn to stop worrying and love genetically modified food”, <em>Reason,</em> Ocak 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1328"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref28">28</a> “EC-sponsored research on safety of genetically modified organisms - A review of results.” EUR 19884, Ekim 2001 Raporu, European Union Office for Publications.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1329"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Ames, Profet ve Gold, “Dietary pesticides (99.9%all natural)”, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1330"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref30">30</a> E. Schlosser, “Why McDonald’s fries taste so good”, <em>Atlantic Monthly,</em> Ocak 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1331"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Ahn ve diğerleri, “Why essences are essential in the psychology of concepts”, 2001; Frazer, <em>Altın dal,</em> 1890/1996 [1991]; Rozin, “Towards a psychology of food and eating: From motivation to module to model to marker, morality, meaning and metaphor”, 1996; Rozin, Markwith ve Stoess, “Moralization and becoming a vegetarian: The transformation of preferences into values and the recruitment of disgust”, 1997; P. Stevens, “Magical thinking in complementary and alternative medicine”, 2001. Ayrıca bkz. M. Stevens, “Only causation matters: Reply to Ahn et al”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1332"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Rozin ve Fallon, “A perspective on disgust”, 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1333"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Ahn ve diğerleri, “Why essences are essential in the psychology of concepts”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1334"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Rozin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1996; Rozin ve Fallon, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987; Rozin, Markwith ve Stoess, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1335"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref35">35</a> <em>Ivy League:</em> ABD’nin kuzey doğusundaki üniversiteler ile kolejlerin meydana getirdiği birlik; akademik başarıları, sosyal prestijleriyle ünlüdürler. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1336"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Rozin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1337"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Mayr, <em>The growth of biological thought,</em> 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1338"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Ames, Profet ve Gold, “Dietary pesticides (99.9%all natural)”, 1990; Lewis, <em>Technological risk,</em> 1990; G. Gray ve D. Ropeik, “What me worry?” <em>Boston Globe,</em> 11 Kasım 2001, s. E8.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1339"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Marx ve Nesse, “Fear and fitness: An evolutionary analysis of anxiety disorders”, 1994; Seligman, “Phobias and preparedness”, 1971.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1340"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Slovic, Fischof ve Lichtenstein, “Facts versus fears: Understanding perceived risk”, 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1341"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Sharpe, <em>William Hill’s bizarre bets</em>, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1342"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Cosmides ve Tooby, “Are humans good intuitive statisticians after all? Rethinking some conclusions from the literature on judgment under uncertainty”, 1996; Gigerenzer, “How to make cognitive illusions disappear: Beyond heuristics and biases”, 1991 ve “Ecological intelligence: An adaptation for frequencies”, 1997; Pinker, <em>How the mind works</em>, 1997, 5. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1343"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Hoffrage ve diğerleri, “Communicating statistical information”, 2000; Tversky ve Kahneman, “Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability”, 1973.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1344"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Slovic, Fischof ve Lichtenstein, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1345"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Tooby ve DeVore, “The reconstruction of hominid evolution through strategic modeling”, 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1346"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Fiske, “The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for a unified theory of social relations”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1347"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Cosmides ve Tooby, “Cognitive adaptations for social exchange”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1348"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Sowell, <em>Knowledge and decisions,</em> 1980.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1349"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Sowell, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1980 ve <em>Migrations and cultures: A world view,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1350"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Sowell, <em>Race and culture</em> 1994 ve <em>Migrations and cultures</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1351"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref51">51</a> R. Radford (1945 tarihli yazı), aktaran: Sowell, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994, s. 57.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1352"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref52">52</a> “The figure of the youth as virile Poet”: Stevens, <em>The necessary angel,</em> 1965.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1353"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Jackendoff, <em>Consciousness and the computational mind,</em> 1987; Pinker, <em>How the mind works</em> 1997 ve <em>Words and rules</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1354"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Bailey, “The law of increasing returns”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1355"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Sen, <em>Poverty and famines: An essay on entitlement and deprivation,</em> 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1356"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref56">56</a> Simon, <em>The ultimate resource</em> 2, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1357"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref57">57</a> Bailey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Romer, “Increasing returns and new developments in the theory of growth”, 1991; Romer ve Nelson, “Science, economic growth, and public policy”, 1996; P. Romer, “Ideas and things”, <em>Economist,</em> 11 Eylül 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1358"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref58">58</a> Romer ve Nelson, “Science, economic growth, and public policy”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1359"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref59">59</a> Aktaran: M. Kumar, “Quantum reality”, <em>Prometheus</em>, 2, 1999, s.20-21.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1360"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref60">60</a> Aktaran: M. Kumar, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1361"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref61">61</a> Aktaran: Dawkins, <em>Unweaving the rainbow…</em>, 1998, s. 50.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1362"><a class="backref" href="../Text/13.xhtml#ref62">62</a> McGinn, <em>Problems in philosophy: The limits of inquiry</em>, 1993 ve <em>The mysterious flame: Conscious minds in a material world</em>, 1999; Pinker, <em>How the mind works</em>, 1997, 8. bölüm.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">14 Acılarımızın Kökleri</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n141"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Trivers, “The evolution of reciprocal altruism”, 1971; “Parental investment and sexual selection”, 1972; “Parent-offspring conflict”, 1974; “Dawkins’in <em>Gen Bencildir</em> adlı kitabının önsözü”, 1976 ve <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n142"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Alexander, <em>The biology of moral systems,</em> 1987; Cronin, <em>The ant and the peacock,</em> 1992; Dawkins, <em>Gen Bencildir,</em> 1976/1989 [2007]; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997; Wright, <em>The moral animal…,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n143"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Hamilton, “The genetical evolution of social behaviour (I ve II)”, 1964; Trivers, “The evolution of reciprocal altruism”, 1971, “Parental investment and sexual selection”, 1972 ve “Parent-offspring conflict”, 1974; Williams, <em>Adaptation and natural selection: A critique of some current evolutionary thought,</em> 1966.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n144"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref4">4</a> “Renewing American Civilization”, Reinhardt College’de yapılan bir konuşma, 7 Ocak 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n145"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Chagnon, “Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal population”, 1988; Daly, Salmon ve Wilson, “Kinship: The conceptual hole in psychological studies of social cognition and close relationships”, 1997; Fox, <em>Kinship and marriage: An anthropological perspective,</em> 1984; Mount, <em>The subversive family: An alternative history of love and marriage,</em> 1992; Shoumatoff, <em>The mountain of names: A history of the human family,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n146"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Chagnon, <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden,</em> 1992; Daly, Salmon ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Gaulin ve McBurney, <em>Psychology: An evolutionary approach,</em> 2001, s. 321-329.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n147"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Burnstein, Crandall ve Kitayama, “Some neo-Darwinian decision rules for altruism: Weighing cues for inclusive fitness as a function of the biological importance of the decision”, 1994; Petrinovich, O’Neill ve Jorgensen, “An empirical study of moral intuitions: Toward an evolutionary ethics”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n148"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Petrinovich, O’Neill ve Jorgensen, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1993; Singer, <em>The expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n149"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Masters, <em>The nature of politics,</em> 1989, s. 207-208.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1410"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Aktaran: J. Muravchick, “Socialism’s last stand”, <em>Commentary,</em> Mart 2002, s. 47-53, alıntılar: s. 51.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1411"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Radio Free LA radyo yayını, Ocak 1997, <a href="http://www.radiofreela.com/">www.radiofreela.com</a>. Yazılı metin için bkz. <a href="http://www.zmag/.org/chomsky/rage">www.zmag.org</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1412"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Daly, Salmon ve Wilson, “Kinship: The conceptual hole in psychological studies of social cognition and close relationships”, 1997; Mount, <em>The subversive family: An alternative history of love and marriage,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1413"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Johnson, Ratwik ve Sawyer, “The evocative significance of kin terms in patriotic speech”, 1987; Salmon, “The evocative nature of kin terminology in political rhetoric”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1414"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Fiske, “The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for a unified theory of social relations”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1415"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Trivers, “Parent-offspring conflict”, 1974 ve <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1416"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Agrawal, Brodie ve Brown, “Parent-offspring coadaptation and the dual genetic control of maternal care”, 2001; Godfray, “Evolutionary theory of parent-offspring conflict”, 1995; Trivers, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1417"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Haig, “Genetic conflicts in human pregnancy”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1418"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Hrdy, <em>Mother nature: A history of mothers, infants and natural selection,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1419"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Hrdy, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1420"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Trivers, “Dawkins’in <em>Gen Bencildir</em> adlı kitabının önsözü”, 1976 ve “Sociobiology and politics”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1421"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Trivers, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1422"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do,</em> 1998; Plomin ve Daniels, “Why are children in the same family so different from one another?”, 1987; Rowe, <em>The limits of family influence: Genes, experience, and behavior,</em> 1994; Sulloway, <em>Born to rebel,</em> 1996; Turkheimer, “Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1423"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Trivers, <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985, s. 159.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1424"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Judith Rich Harris’in <em>The nurture assumption</em> eserinde epigraf olarak kullanılmıştır.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1425"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Dunn ve Plomin, <em>Separate lives: Why siblings are so different,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1426"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Hrdy, <em>Mother nature: A history of mothers, infants and natural selection,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1427"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Wilson, <em>The moral sense,</em> 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1428"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1429"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Trivers, “Parental investment and sexual selection”, 1972 ve <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1430"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Blum, <em>Sex on the brain: The biological differences between men and women,</em> 1997; Buss, <em>The evolution of desire,</em> 1994; Geary, <em>Male, female: The evolution of human sex differences,</em> 1998; Ridley, <em>The red queen: Sex and the evolution of human nature,</em> 1993; Symons, <em>The evolution of human sexuality,</em> 1979.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1431"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Buss, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Kenrick ve diğerleri, “Integrating evolutionary and social exchange perspectives on relationships: Effects of gender, self-appraisal and involvement level on mate selection criteria”, 1993; Salmon ve Symons, <em>Warrior lovers,</em> 2001; Symons, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1979.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1432"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Buss, <em>The dangerous passion: Why jealousy is as necessary as love and sex,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1433"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Alexander, <em>The biology of moral systems,</em> 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1434"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991; Symons, <em>The evolution of human sexuality,</em> 1979.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1435"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref35">35</a> K. Kelleher, “When students ‘hook up,’ someone inevitably gets let down”, <em>Los Angeles Times,</em> 13 Agustos 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1436"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Symons, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1979.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1437"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Daly, Salmon ve Wilson, “Kinship: The conceptual hole in psychological studies of social cognition and close relationships”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1438"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Wilson ve Daly, “The man who mistook his wife for a chattel”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1439"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation</em>, 1997. Ayrıca bkz. Lewontin, “How much did the brain have to change for speech?”, 1990</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1440"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Rose ve Rose, <em>Alas, poor Darwin! Arguments against evolutionary psychology</em>, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1441"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Fiske, “The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for a unified theory of social relations”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1442"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Axelrod, <em>The evolution of cooperation,</em> 1984; Dawkins, <em>Gen Bencildir,</em> 1976/1989 [2007]; Ridley, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997; Trivers, “The evolution of reciprocal altruism”, 1971.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1443"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Cosmides ve Tooby, “Cognitive adaptations for social exchange”, 1992; Frank, Gilovich ve Regan, “The evolution of one-shot cooperation: An experiment”, 1993; Gigerenzer ve Hug, “Domain specific reasoning: Social contracts, cheating and perspective change”, 1992; Kanwisher ve Moscovitch, “The cognitive neuroscience of face processing: An introduction”, 2000; Mealey, Daood ve Krage, “Enhanced memory for faces of cheaters”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1444"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Yinon ve Dovrat, “The reciprocity-arousing potential of the requestor’s occupation, its status, and the cost and urgency of the request as determinants of helping behavior”, 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1445"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Gaulin ve McBurney, <em>Psychology: An evolutionary approach,</em> 2001, s. 329-338; Haidt, “The moral emotions”, 2003; Trivers, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1971, s. 49-54.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1446"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Fehr ve Gachter, “Fairness and retaliation: The economics of reciprocity”, 2000; Gintis, “Strong reciprocity and human sociality”, 2000; Price, Cosmides ve Tooby, “Punitive sentiment as an anti-free rider psychological device”, 2002.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1447"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997, s. 84.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1448"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Fehr ve Gachter, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Gaulin ve McBurney, <em>Psychology: An evolutionary approach,</em> 2001, s. 333-335.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1449"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Fehr ve Gachter, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Ridley, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1450"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Williams, Harkins ve Latane, “Identifiability as a deterrent to social loafing…”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1451"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Klaw, <em>Without sin: The life and death of the Oneida community,</em> 1993; McCord, <em>Voyages to Utopia: From monastery to commune: The search for the perfect society in modern times,</em> 1989; Muravchik, <em>Heaven on Earth: The rise and fail of socialism,</em> 2002; Spann, <em>Brotherly tomorrows: Movements for a cooperative society in America, 1820-1920,</em> 1989.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1452"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref52">52</a> Muravchik, “Socialism’s last stand”, <em>Commentary,</em> Mart 2002, s. 47-53, alıntı: s. 53.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1453"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Fiske, “The four elementary forms of sociality…”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1454"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Cashdan, “Hunters and gatherers: Economic behavior in bands”, 1989; Cosmides ve Tooby, “Cognitive adaptations for social exchange”, 1992; Eibl-Eibesfeldt, <em>Human ethology,</em> 1989; Fiske, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1992; Hawkes, O’Connell ve Rogers, “The behavioral ecology of modern hunter-gatherers, and human evolution”, 1997; Kaplan, Hill ve Hurtado, “Risk, foraging, and food sharing among the Ache”, 1990; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1455"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Ridley, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997, s. 111.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1456"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref56">56</a> Williams, <em>Adaptation and natural selection</em> 1966, s. 116.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1457"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref57">57</a> Fehr, Fischbacher ve Gachter, “Strong reciprocity, human cooperation and the enforcement of social norms”, 2002; Gintis, “Strong reciprocity and human sociality”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1458"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref58">58</a> Nunney, “Are we selfish, are we nice, or are we nice because we are selfish?”, 1998; Reeve, “Review of Sober &amp; Wilson’s <em>Unto others</em>”, 2000; Trivers, “As they would do to you: A review of E. Sober ve D. S. Wilson’s ‘Unto others’”, 1998; Wilson ve Sober, “Reintroducing group selection to the human behavior sciences”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1459"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref59">59</a> Williams, “Huxley’s evolution and ethics in sociobiological perspective”, 1988, s. 391-392.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1460"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref60">60</a> Frank, <em>Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions,</em> 1988; Hirshleifer, “On the emotions as guarantors of threats and promises”, 1987; Trivers, “The evolution of reciprocal altruism”, 1971.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1461"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref61">61</a> Hare, <em>Vicdansızlar: Antisosyal Kişilik Bozukluğu,</em> 1993 [2006]; Lykken, <em>The antisocial personalities,</em> 1995; Mealey, “The sociobiology of sociopathy: An integrated evolutionary model”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1462"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref62">62</a> Antisosyal özelliklerin kalıtsallığı için bkz. Bock ve Goode, <em>The genetics of criminal and antisocial behavior,</em> 1996; Deater-Deckard ve Plomin, “An adoption study of the etiology of teacher and parent reports of externalising behavior problems in middle childhood”, 1999; Krueger, Hicks ve McGue, “Altruism and antisocial behavior: Independent tendencies, unique personality correlates, distinct etiologies”, 2001; Lykken, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; Mealey, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; Rushton ve diğerleri, “Altruism and aggression: The heritability of individual differences”, 1986. Özgecilik konusunda yapılan bir çalışma onun kalıtsal olduğunu saptayamadı (Krueger, Hicks ve McGue, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001), ama iki katı denek kullanan başka bir çalışmada kalıtsal olduğu bulundu (Rushton ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1986).</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1463"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref63">63</a> Miller, “Sexual selection for indicators of intelligence”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1464"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref64">64</a> Tooby ve Cosmides, “On the universality of human nature and the uniqueness of the individual: The role of genetics and adaptation”, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1465"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref65">65</a> Axelrod, <em>The evolution of cooperation,</em> 1984; Dawkins, <em>Gen Bencildir,</em> 1976/1989 [2007]; Nowak, May ve Sigmund, “The arithmetic of mutual help”, 1995; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1466"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref66">66</a> Dugatkin, “The evolution of the con artist”, 1992; Harpending ve Sobus, “Sociopathy as an adaptation”, 1987; Mealey, “The sociobiology of sociopathy: An integrated evolutionary model”, 1995; Rice, “Violent offender research and implications for the criminal justice system”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1467"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref67">67</a> Rice, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1468"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref68">68</a> Lalumière, Harris ve Rice, “Psychopathy and developmental instability”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1469"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref69">69</a> M. Kakutani, “The strange case of the writer and the criminal”, <em>New York Times Book Review,</em> 20 Eylül 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1470"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref70">70</a> S. McGraw, “Some used their second chance at life; others squandered it”, <em>The Record</em> (Bergen County, N.J.), 12 Ekim 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1471"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref71">71</a> Rice, “Violent offender research and implications for the criminal justice system”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1472"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref72">72</a> Trivers, “Dawkins’in <em>Gen Bencildir</em> adlı kitabının önsözü”, 1976.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1473"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref73">73</a> Goleman, <em>Hayati yalanlar, basit Gerçekler: Kendini aldatmanın psikolojisi,</em> 1985 [1999]; Greenwald, “Self-knowledge and self-deception”, 1988; Krebs ve Denton, “Social illusions and self-deception: The evolution of biases in person perception”, 1997; Lockard ve Paulhaus, <em>Self-deception: An adaptive mechanism,</em> 1988; Rue, <em>By the grace of guile: The role of deception in natural history and human affairs,</em> 1994; Taylor, <em>Positive illusions: Creative self-deception and the healthy mind,</em> 1989; Trivers, <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985; Wright, <em>The moral animal</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1474"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref74">74</a> Nesse ve Lloyd, “The evolution of psychodynamic mechanisms”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1475"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref75">75</a> Gazzaniga, <em>The mind’s past,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1476"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref76">76</a> Damasio, <em>Descartes’ın yanılgısı: Duygu, akıl ve insan beyni,</em> 1994 [1999], s. 68.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1477"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref77">77</a> Babcock ve Loewenstein, “Explaining bargaining impasse: The role of self-serving biases”, 1997; Rue, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Taylor, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1989.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1478"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref78">78</a> Aronson, <em>Toplumsal Hayvan,</em> 1980; Festinger, <em>A theory of cognitive dissonance,</em> 1957; Greenwald, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1479"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref79">79</a> Haidt, “The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to moral judgment”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1480"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref80">80</a> Dutton, “Aesthetic universals”, 2001, s. 209; Fox, <em>The search for society</em> …, 1989; Hogan, “Literary universals”, 1997; Polti, <em>The thirty-six dramatic situations,</em> 1921/1977; Storey, <em>Mimesis and the human animal,</em> 1996, s. 110, 142.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1481"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref81">81</a> Steiner, <em>Antigones: How the Antigone legend has endured in Western literature, art, and thought,</em> 1984, s. 1, 231, 300-301.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1482"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref82">82</a> Symons, <em>The evolution of human sexuality,</em> 1979, s. 271.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1483"><a class="backref" href="../Text/14.xhtml#ref83">83</a> D. Symons, kişisel iletişim, 30 Temmuz 2001.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">15 Kutsallık Taslayan Hayvan</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n151"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Alexander, <em>The biology of moral systems,</em> 1987; Haidt, “The moral emotions”, 2003; Krebs, “The evolution of moral behaviors”, 1998; Trivers, “The evolution of reciprocal altruism”, 1971; Wilson, <em>The moral sense,</em> 1993; Wright, <em>The moral animal: Evolutionary pschology and everyday life,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n152"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Haidt, Koller ve Dias, “Affect, culture and morality, or Is it wrong to eat your dog?”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n153"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Haidt, “The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to moral judgment”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n154"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Haidt, “The moral emotions”, 2003.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n155"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Shweder ve diğerleri, “The ‘big three’ of morality (autonomy, community and divinity) and the ‘big three’ explanations of suffering”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n156"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Haidt, “The moral emotions”, 2003; Rozin, “Moralization”, 1997; Rozin, Markwith ve Stoess, “Moralization and becoming a vegetarian: The transformation of preferences into values and the recruitment of disgust”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n157"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Glendon, <em>A world made new: Eleanor Roosevelt and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,</em> 2001; Sen, “East and West: The reach of reason”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n158"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Cronk, <em>That complex whole: Culture and the evolution of human behavior,</em> 1999; Sommers, “Why Johnny can’t tell right from wrong”, 1998; Wilson, <em>The moral sense,</em> 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n159"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref9">9</a> D. Symons, kişisel iletişim, 26 Temmuz 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1510"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Etcoff, <em>Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1511"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref11">11</a> <em>Jim Crow Yasaları:</em> Amerika Birleşik Devletleri’nde bir zamanlar (1880’lerden 1960’ların ortalarına değin süren ve ırklar arası evlilik yasağından istasyonlarda ayrı bekleme odalarının oluşturulmasına dek) siyahları beyazlardan ayıran ırkçı yasalara verilen ad. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1512"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi</em>, 1999 [2003].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1513"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref13">13</a> L. Kass, “The wisdom of repugnance”, <em>New Republic</em>, 2 Haziran 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1514"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Rozin, “Moralization”, 1997; Rozin, Markwith ve Stoess, “Moralization and becoming a vegetarian: The transformation of preferences into values and the recruitment of disgust”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1515"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref15">15</a> <em>Moral Majority:</em> Rahip Jerry Falwell tarafından, ABD’de 1979 yılında kurulan sağcı evanjelik Hıristiyan grubu. Kürtaj ve eşcinsel haklarına karşı çıkılması gibi politik konulardan, okullarda yaratılışcılık öğretisinin anlatılması gibi dinsel meselelerde faaliyet gösterdiler. 1989 yılında kendini resmen feshetmesinin ardından bu isim ABD’deki dinsel sağ kanat grupları kapsayan bir şemsiye anlamında kullanılacaktır. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1516"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref16">16</a> <em>Babbitt:</em> Sinclair Lewis’in yazdığı ve aynı adı taşıyan 1922 tarihli bir romandan ötürü, orta sınıf Amerikan yaşam tarzını sürdürenlere verilen ad. <em>Maviburun</em> (bluenose): Kanada’da bir bölge olan Nova Scotia sakinlerine takılan isim. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1517"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Tetlock, “Coping with tradeoffs: Psychological constraints and political implications”, 1999; Tetlock ve diğerleri, “The psychology of the unthinkable: Taboo tradeoffs, forbidden base rates, and heretical counterfactuals”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1518"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Tetlock, “Coping with tradeoffs: Psychological constraints and political implications”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1519"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Tetlock ve diğerleri, “The psychology of the unthinkable: Taboo tradeoffs, forbidden base rates and heretical counterfactuals”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1520"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Hume, <em>İnsan doğası üzerine bir inceleme</em>, 1739/2000 [2009].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1521"><a class="backref" href="../Text/15.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Buruma, “Ian Kershaw’un <em>Hitler 1936-45: Nemesis</em> adlı eserinin incelemesi” <em>New York Times Book Review</em>, 10 Aralık 2000, s. 13.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">V. Kısım</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart51"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part5.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Haidt ve Hersh, “Sexual morality: The cultures and emotions of conservatives and liberals”, 2001; Tetlock, “Coping with tradeoffs: Psychological constraints and political implications”, 1999; Tetlock ve diğerleri, “The psychology of the unthinkable: Taboo tradeoffs, forbidden base rates and heretical counterfactuals”, 2000.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">16 Siyaset</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n161"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Gilbert ve Sullivan, <em>Iolanthe.</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n162"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Kişisel iletişim, D. Lykken, 11 Nisan 2001. Muhafazakâr tutumlara dair diğer kalıtsallık tahminleri 0,4 ila 0,5 arası değerlerdedir: Bouchard ve diğerleri, “Sources of human psychological differences: The Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart”, 1990; Eaves, Eysenck ve Martin, <em>Genes, culture and personality: An empirical approach,</em> 1989; Holden, “The genetics of personality”, 1987; Martin ve diğerleri, “Transmission of social attitudes”, 1986; Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavioral genetics,</em> 1997, s. 206; Scarr ve Weinberg, “The transmission of authoritarian attitudes in families: Genetic resemblance in social-political attitudes?”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n163"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Tesser, “The importance of heritability in psychological research…”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n164"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Wilson, <em>Naturalist,</em> 1994, s. 338-339.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n165"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Masters, “Is sociobiology reactionary? The political implications of inclusive-fitness theory”, 1982; Masters, <em>The nature of politics,</em> 1989.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n166"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Dawkins, <em>Gen Bencildir,</em> 1976/1989 [2007]; Williams, <em>Adaptation and natural selection: A critique of some current evolutionary thought,</em> 1966.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n167"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Boyd ve Silk, <em>How humans evolved,</em> 1996; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997; Trivers, <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n168"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref8">8</a> <em>Meritokrasi:</em> Gücün üstün zekâlıların elinde olduğu sosyal sistem biçimi. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n169"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Sowell, <em>The vision of the anointed: Self-congratulation as a basis for social policy,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1610"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref10">10</a> <em>Fabiancılık</em>: Britanyalı aydınların XIX. yüzyıl sonunda başlattığı bir sosyalist hareket; yasaların kapsamından çıkmadan aşamalı reformlarla sosyalizme ulaşmak hedeflenmiştir. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1611"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Bernard Shaw, <em>On the rocks: A political fantasy in two acts</em>’ın önsözünden.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1612"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Burke, <em>Reflections on the revolution in France,</em> 1790/1967, s. 93.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1613"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Aktaran: E. M. Kennedy, “Tribute to Senator Robert F. Kennedy”, 8 Haziran 1968.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1614"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Hayek, <em>Hukuk, yasama ve özgürlük (Sosyal adalet serabı)</em>, 1976 [1995], s. 64, 33.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1615"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Aktaran: Sowell, <em>The vision of the anointed: Self-congratulation as a basis for social policy,</em> 1995, s. 227, 112.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1616"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref16">16</a> “Yasa bunu uygun görüyorsa… o zaman yasa eşektir - budaladır” (<em>Oliver Twist</em>).</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1617"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Aktaran: Sowell, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995, s. 11.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1618"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Hayek, <em>Hukuk, yasama ve özgürlük (Sosyal adalet serabı),</em> 1976 [1995].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1619"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Dilbilimci George Lakoff’a göre bu nokta, sağ/sol bölünmesinin psikolojik zemininde bir temas yeridir: sol görüş, hükümetin destekleyici bir aile büyüğü gibi davranmasını öngörürken, sağ görüş katı bir aile büyüğü olarak hareket etmesi gerektiğine inanır; bkz. Lakoff, <em>Moral politics: What conservatives know that liberals don’t,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1620"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Bkz. 14. Bölüm. Ayrıca Burnstein, Crandall ve Kitayama, “Some neo-Darwinian decision rules for altruism: Weighing cues for inclusive fitness as a function of the biological importance of the decision”, 1994; Chagnon, <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden,</em> 1992; Daly, Salmon ve Wilson, “Kinship: The conceptual hole in psychological studies of social cognition and close relationships”, 1997; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Fox, <em>Kinship and marriage: An anthropological perspective,</em> 1984; Gaulin ve McBurney, <em>Psychology: An evolutionary approach,</em> 2001, s. 321-329; Mount, <em>The subversive family: An alternative history of love and marriage,</em> 1992; Petrinovich, O’Neill ve Jorgensen, “An empirical study of moral intuitions: Toward an evolutionary ethics”, 1993; Shoumatoff, <em>The mountain of names: A history of the human family,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1621"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Bkz. 14. Bölüm. Ayrıca Bowles ve Gintis, <em>Recasting egalitarianism: New rules for communities, states and markets,</em> 1999; Cosmides ve Tooby, “Cognitive adaptations for social exchange”, 1992; Fehr, Fischbacher ve Gâchter, “Strong reciprocity, human cooperation and the enforcement of social norms”, 2002; Fehr ve Gâchter, “Fairness and retaliation: The economics of reciprocity”, 2000; Fiske, “The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for a unified theory of social relations”, 1992; Gaulin ve McBurney, <em>Psychology: An evolutionary approach,</em> 2001, s. 333-335; Gintis, “Strong reciprocity and human sociality”, 2000; Klaw, <em>Without sin: The life and death of the Oneida community,</em> 1993; McCord, <em>Voyages to Utopia: From monastery to commune: The search for the perfect society in modern times,</em> 1989; Muravchik, <em>Heaven on Earth: The rise and fail of socialism,</em> 2002; Price, Cosmides ve Tooby, “Punitive sentiment as an anti-free rider psychological device”, 2002; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997; Spann, <em>Brotherly tomorrows: Movements fora cooperative society in America, 1820-1920,</em> 1989; Williams, Harkins ve Latané, “Identifiability as a deterrent to social loafing: Two cheering experiments”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1622"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Bkz. 3. ve 17. Bölümler. Özellikle Blair ve Cipolotti, “Impaired social response reversal: A case of ‘acquired sociopathy’”, 2000; Bock ve Goode, <em>The genetics of criminal and antisocial behavior,</em> 1996; Buss ve Duntley, “Why the mind is designed for murder: The coevolution of killing and death prevention strategies”; Davidson, Putnam ve Larson, “Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion regulation: A possible prelude to violence”, 2000; Divale, “System population control in the middle and upper Paleolithic: Inferences based on contemporary hunter-gatherers”, 1972; Eibl-Eibesfeldt, <em>Human ethology,</em> 1989, s. 323; Ember, “Myths about hunter-gatherers”, 1978; Geary, <em>Male, female: The evolution of human sex differences,</em> 1998, s. 226-227; Ghiglieri, <em>Erkeğin karanlık yüzü,</em> 1999 [2002]; Hare, <em>Vicdansızlar: Antisosyal kişilik bozukluğu,</em> 1993 [2006]; Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage,</em> 1996; Kenrick ve Sheets, “Homicide fantasies”, 1994; Kirwin, <em>The mad, the bad, and the innocent: The criminal mind on trial,</em> 1997; Knauft, “Reconsidering violence in simple human societies”, 1987; LeVay, <em>The sexual brain,</em> 1993; Lykken, <em>The antisocial personalities,</em> 1995; Mealey, “The sociobiology of sociopathy: An integrated evolutionary model”, 1995; Renfrew, <em>Aggression and its causes: A biopsychosocial approach,</em> 1997; Sherif, <em>Group conflict and cooperation: Their social psychology,</em> 1966; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>Demonic males: Apes and the origins of human violence,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1623"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991; Brown, <em>Social psychology</em> 1985; Sherif, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1966; Tajfel, <em>Human groups and social categories,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1624"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Bkz. 3. ve 19. Bölümler. Ayrıca Bouchard, “Genes, environment and personality”, 1994; Neisser ve diğerleri, “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns”, 1996; Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1625"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Bkz. 14. Bölüm. Ayrıca Aronson, <em>Toplumsal Hayvan,</em> 1980; Festinger, <em>A theory of cognitive dissonance,</em> 1957; Gazzaniga, <em>The mind’s past,</em> 1998; Greenwald, “Self-knowledge and self-deception”, 1988; Nesse ve Lloyd, “The evolution of psychodynamic mechanisms”, 1992; Wright, <em>The moral animal…,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1626"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Bkz. 15. bölüm. Ayrıca Haidt, “The moral emotions”, 2003; Haidt, Roller ve Dias, “Affect, culture and morality, or Is it wrong to eat your dog?”, 1993; Petrinovich, O’Neill ve Jorgensen, “An empirical study of moral intuitions: Toward an evolutionary ethics”, 1993; Rozin, Markwith ve Stoess, “Moralization and becoming a vegetarian: The transformation of preferences into values and the recruitment of disgust”, 1997; Shweder ve diğerleri, “The ‘big three’ of morality (autonomy, community, and divinity) and the ‘big three’ explanations of suffering”, 1997; Singer, <em>The expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology,</em> 1981; Tetlock, “Coping with tradeoffs…”, 1999; Tetlock ve diğerleri, “The psychology of the unthinkable…”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1627"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Sowell, <em>A conflict of visions: Ideological origins of political struggles,</em> 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1628"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Marx ve Engels, <em>1844 Elyazmalan Ekonomi Politik ve Felsefe,</em> 1844/1988 [1993].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1629"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Aktaran: Singer, <em>A Darwinian left: Politics, evolution and cooperation,</em> 1999, s. 4.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1630"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Bullock, <em>Hitler and Stalin: Parallel lives,</em> 1991; Chirot, <em>Modern tyrants,</em> 1994; Conquest, <em>Reflections on a ravaged century,</em> 2000; Courtois ve diğerleri, <em>The black book of communism</em> 1999; Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1631"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Aktaran: J. Getlin, “Natural wonder: At heart, Edward Wilson’s an ant man”, <em>Los Angeles Times,</em> 21 Ekim 1994, s. El</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1632"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Rossiter, <em>The Federalist Papers,</em> 1961, s. 322, Federal Belgeler No. 51.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1633"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Bailyn, <em>The ideological origins of the American revolution,</em> 1967/1992; Maier, <em>American scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1634"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Lutz, “The relative influence of European writers on late eighteenth-centuiy American political thought”, 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1635"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref35">35</a> McGinnis, “The original constitution and our origins”, 1996 ve “The human constitution and constitutive law: A prolegomenon”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1636"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Rossiter, <em>The Federalist Papers,</em> 1961, s. 78, Federal Belgeler No. 10.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1637"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Aktaran: McGinnis, “The human constitution and constitutive law: A prolegomenon”, 1997, s. 236.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1638"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Rossiter, <em>The Federalist Papers,</em> 1961, Hamilton: Federal Belgeler No. 72, s. 437 ve Madison: Federal Belgeler No. 51, s. 322.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1639"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Rossiter, <em>The Federalist Papers,</em> 1961, Federal Belgeler No. 51, s. 331-332.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1640"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref40">40</a> <em>Helvedius No. 4</em>’ten; aktaran: McGinnis, “The human constitution and constitutive law: A prolegomenon”, 1997, s. 130.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1641"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Boehm, <em>Hierarchy in the forest: The evolution of egalitarian behavior</em>, 1999; de Waal, <em>Chimpanzee politics: Power and sex among the apes</em>, 1998; Dunbar, <em>Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of language</em>, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1642"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Singer’ın tezlerinin benzerleri için bkz. Brociner, “Utopianism, human nature and the left”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1643"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Chomsky, “Language and freedom”, 1970, s. 22</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1644"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Bkz. Barsky, <em>Noam Chomsky: Bir muhalifin yaşamı</em>, 1997; Chomsky, 1988a</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1645"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Chomsky, <em>Reflections on language</em>, 1975, s. 131.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1646"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Trivers, “Sociobiology and politics”, 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1647"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref47">47</a> A. Wooldridge, “Bell Curve liberals”, <em>New Republic</em>, 27 Şubat 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1648"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Herrnstein ve Murray, <em>The bell curve: Intelligence and class structure in American life</em> 1994, 22. bölüm. Ayrıca bkz. 1996 edisyonunda Murray’ın yazdığı sonsöz.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1649"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Gigerenzer ve Selten, <em>Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox,</em> 2001; Jones, “Time-shifted rationality and the Law of Law’s Leverage: Behavioral economics meets behavioral biology”, 2001; Kahneman ve Tversky, “Choices, values, and frames”, 1984; Thaler, <em>The winner’s curse,</em> 1994; Tversky ve Kahneman, “Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases”, 1974.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1650"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Akerlof, <em>An economic theorist’s book of tales: Essays that entertain the consequences of new assumptions in economic theory,</em> 1984; Daly ve Wilson, “Evolutionary psychology of male violence”, 1994; Jones, “Time-shifted rationality and the Law of Law’s Leverage: Behavioral economics meets behavioral biology”, 2001; Rogers, “Evolution of time preference by natural selection”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1651"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Frank, <em>Luxury fever: When money fails to satisfy in an era of excess,</em> 1999; Frank, <em>Choosing the right pond: Human behavior and the quest for status,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1652"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref52">52</a> Bowles ve Gintis, “Is equality passé? Homo reciprocans and the future of egalitarian politics”, 1998 ve <em>Recasting egalitarianism: New rules for communities, states and markets,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1653"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Gintis, “Strong reciprocity and human sociality”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1654"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Wilkinson, <em>Mind the gap: Hierarchies, health and human evolution,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1655"><a class="backref" href="../Text/16.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Daly, Wilson ve Vasdev, “Income inequality and homicide rates in Canada and the United States”, 2001; Wilson ve Daly, “Life expectancy, economic inequality, homicide, and reproductive timing in Chicago neighborhoods”, 1997.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">17 Şiddet</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n171"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Aktaran: R. Cooper, “The long peace”, <em>Prospect,</em> Nisan 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n172"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref2">2</a> National Defense Council Foundation, Alexandria, VA., <a href="http://www.ndcf.org/index.htm">www.ndcf.org/index.htm</a>.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n173"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Bamforth, “Indigenous people, indigenous violence…”, 1994; Chagnon, “Chronic problems in understanding tribal violence and warfare”, 1996; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Ember, “Myths about hunter-gatherers”, 1978; Ghiglieri, <em>Erkeğin karanlık yüzü,</em> 1999 [2002]; Gibbons, “Archaeologists rediscover cannibals”, 1997; Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage,</em> 1996; Kingdon, <em>Self-made man: Human evolution from Eden to extinction?,</em> 1993; Knauft, “Reconsidering violence in simple human societies”, 1987; Krech, “Genocide in tribal society”, 1994 ve <em>The ecological Indian: Myth and history,</em> 1999; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>Demonic males: Apes and the origins of human violence,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n174"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage,</em> 1996; Walker, “A bioarchaeological perspective on the history of violence”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n175"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Gibbons, “Archaeologists rediscover cannibals”, 1997; Holden, “Molecule shows Anasazi ate their enemies”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n176"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Fernández-Jalvo ve diğerleri, “Evidence of early cannibalism”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n177"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref7">7</a> FBI Suç Raporları 1999: <a href="http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/99cius.htm">www.fbi.gov/ucr/99cius.htm</a>.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n178"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref8">8</a> “The Seville Statement on Violence”, <em>American Psychologist</em>, 45, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n179"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Ortega y Gasset, <em>Kitlelerin ayaklanışı,</em> 1932/1985 [1968], sonsöz.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1710"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref10">10</a> <em>New York Times,</em> 13 Haziran 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1711"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Paul Biggins, aktaran: B. H. Kevles ve D. J. Kevles, “Scapegoat biology”, <em>Discover,</em> October 1997 <em>New York Times,</em> 13 Haziran 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1712"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref12">12</a> B. H. Kevles ve D. J. Kevles, “Scapegoat biology”, <em>Discover,</em> October 1997, s. 59-62.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1713"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Daphne White, aktaran: M. Wilkinson, “Parent group lists ‘dirty dozen’ toys”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 5 Aralık 2000, s. A5.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1714"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref14">14</a> H. Spivak ve D. Prothrow-Stith, “The next tragedy of Jonesboro”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 5 Nisan 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1715"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref15">15</a> C. Burrell, “Study of inmates cites abuse factor”, Associated Press, 27 Nisan 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1716"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref16">16</a> G. Kane, “Violence as a cultural imperative”, <em>Boston Sunday Globe,</em> 6 Ekim 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1717"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Aktaran: A. Flint, “Some see bombing’s roots in a US culture of conflict”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 1 Haziran 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1718"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref18">18</a> M. Zuckoff, “More murders, more debate”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 31 Temmuz 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1719"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref19">19</a> A. Diamant, “What’s the matter with men?” <em>Boston Globe Magazine,</em> 14 Mart 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1720"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Mesquida ve Wiener, “Human collective aggression: A behavioral ecology perspective”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1721"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Freedman, <em>Media violence and aggression: No evidence for a connection,</em> 2002.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1722"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Fischoff, “Psychology’s quixotic quest for the media-violence connection”, 1999; Freedman “Effect of television violence on aggressiveness”, 1984, “Violence in the mass media and violence in society: The link is unproven”, 1996 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2002; Renfrew, <em>Aggression and its causes: A biopsychosocial approach,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1723"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Charlton, “The inception of broadcast television: A naturalistic study of television’s effects in St. Helena, South Atlantic”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1724"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref24">24</a> J. Q. Wilson, “Hostility in America”, <em>New Republic,</em> 25 Ağustos 1997, s. 38-41.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1725"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Nisbett ve Cohen, <em>Culture of honor: The psychology of violence in the South,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1726"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref26">26</a> E. Marshal, “The shots heard ’round the world”, <em>Science</em>, 289, 2000, s. 570-574.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1727"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Wakefield, “The concept of mental disorder…”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1728"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref28">28</a> M. Enserink, “Searching for the mark of Cain”, <em>Science</em>, 289, 2000, s. 575-579.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1729"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988, s. ix.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1730"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Shipman, <em>The evolution of racism,</em> 1994, s. 252.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1731"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref31">31</a> E. Marshal, “A sinister plot or victim of politics?” <em>Science</em>, 289, 2000, s. 571.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1732"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Shipman, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1994, s. 243.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1733"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Aktaran: Robert Wright, “The biology of violence”, <em>New Yorker</em>, 13 Mart 1995, s. 68-77.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1734"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1988; Rogers, “Evolution of time preference by natural selection”, 1994; Wilson ve Herrnstein, <em>Crime and human nature</em>, 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1735"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Frederick Goodwin; aktaran: Robert Wright, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1995, s. 70</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1736"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Holden, “The violence of the lambs”, 2000, s. 580-581.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1737"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Hare, <em>Vicdansızlar: Antisosyal Kişilik Bozukluğu,</em> 1993 [2006]; Lykken, <em>The antisocial personalities,</em> 1995; Rice, “Violent offender research and implications for the criminal justice system”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1738"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Ghiglieri, <em>Erkeğin karanlık yüzü</em>, 1999 [2002]; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>Demonic males: Apes and the origins of human violence,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1739"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Davidson, Putnam ve Larson, “Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion regulation: A possible prelude to violence”, 2000; Renfrew, <em>Aggression and its causes: A biopsychosocial approach,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1740"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Geary, <em>Male, female: The evolution of human sex differences,</em> 1998, s. 226-227; Sherif, <em>Group conflict and cooperation: Their social psychology,</em> 1966.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1741"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref41">41</a> R. Tremblay, aktaran: Holden, “The violence of the lambs”, 2000, s. 580-581.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1742"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Buss ve Duntley, “Why the mind is designed for murder: The coevolution of killing and death prevention strategies”; Kenrick ve Sheets, “Homicide fantasies”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1743"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Hobbes, <em>Leviathan</em>, XIII. Bölüm, 1651/1957 [1993], s. 185 [94].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1744"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Bueno de Mesquita, <em>The war trap,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1745"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Trivers, “Parental investment and sexual selection”, 1972.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1746"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Chagnon, <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden,</em> 1992; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1747"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988, s. 163.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1748"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Rogers, “Evolution of time preference by natural selection”, 1994; Wilson ve Daly, “Life expectancy, economic inequality, homicide, and reproductive timing in Chicago neighborhoods”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1749"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Wilson ve Herrnstein, <em>Crime and human nature,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1750"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Mesquida ve Wiener, “Human collective aggression: A behavioral ecology perspective”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1751"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Singer, <em>The expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1752"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref52">52</a> Wright, <em>NonZero: The logic of human destiny,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1753"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi,</em> 1999 [2003].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1754"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Zimbardo, Maslach ve Haney, “Reflections on the Stanford Prison Experiment: Gene sis, transformations, consequences”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1755"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Aktaran: Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 53.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1756"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref56">56</a> Aktaran: Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 37-38.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1757"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref57">57</a> Bourke, <em>Öldürmenin mahrem tarihi: Yirminci yüzyıl savaşlarında yüz yüze öldürme,</em> 1999 [2001], s. 63-64; Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003]; Graves, “‘Naked truths for the asking’: Twentieth-century military historians and the battlefield narrative”, 1992; Horowitz, <em>The deadly ethnic riot,</em> 2001; Spiller, “S. L. A. Marshall and the ratio of fire”, 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1758"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref58">58</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide</em>, 1988; Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi</em>, 1999 [2003]; Schelling, <em>The strategy of conflict</em>, 1960.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1759"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref59">59</a> Chagnon, <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden,</em> 1992; Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988; Wrangham ve Peterson, <em>Demonic males: Apes and the origins of human violence,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1760"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref60">60</a> van den Berghe, <em>The ethnic phenomenon,</em> 1981.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1761"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref61">61</a> Epstein, “On the mathematical biology of arms races, wars, and revolutions”, 1994; Epstein ve Axtell, <em>Growing artificial societies: Social science from the bottom up,</em> 1996; Richardson, <em>Statistics of deadly quarrels,</em> 1960; Saperstein, “War and chaos”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1762"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref62">62</a> Chagnon, “Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal population”, 1988 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1992</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1763"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref63">63</a> Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1764"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref64">64</a> Vasquez, “The steps to war: Toward a scientific explanation of Correlates of War findings”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1765"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref65">65</a> Rosen, “War power and the willingness to suffer”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1766"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref66">66</a> Wrangham, “Is military incompetence adaptive?”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1767"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref67">67</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide</em>, 1988, s. 225-226.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1768"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref68">68</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988; Frank, <em>Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions,</em> 1988; Schelling, <em>The strategy of conflict,</em> 1960.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1769"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref69">69</a> Brown, <em>Social psychology,</em> 1985; Horowitz, <em>The deadly ethnic riot,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1770"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref70">70</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988; Fox ve Zawitz, <em>Homicide trends in the United States,</em> 2000; Nisbett ve Cohen, <em>Culture of honor: The psychology of violence in the South,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1771"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref71">71</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988, s. 127.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1772"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref72">72</a> <em>A.g.e.,</em> 1988, s. 229.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1773"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref73">73</a> Chagnon, <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden</em>, 1992; Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide</em>, 1988; Frank, <em>Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions</em>, 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1774"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref74">74</a> Nisbett ve Cohen, <em>Culture of honor: The psychology of violence in the South</em>, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1775"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref75">75</a> Ayrıca bkz. Patterson, <em>The ordeal of integration,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1776"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref76">76</a> Anderson, “The code of the streets”, <em>Atlantic Monthly,</em> Mayıs 1994, s. 81-94.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1777"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref77">77</a> Helmuth, “Has America’s tide of violence receded for good?”, 2000, s. 583.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1778"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref78">78</a> Wilkinson, <em>Mind the gap</em> 2000; Wilson ve Daly, “Life expectancy, economic inequality, homicide, and reproductive timing in Chicago neighborhoods”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1779"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref79">79</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption</em> 1998, s. 212-213.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1780"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref80">80</a> Hobbes, <em>Leviathan</em>, 1651/1957 [1993], s. 190 [97] ve 223 [127]</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1781"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref81">81</a> Fry, “Conflict management in cross-cultural perspective”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1782"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref82">82</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide</em>, 1988; Keeley, <em>War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage</em>, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1783"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref83">83</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988; Nisbett ve Cohen, <em>Culture of honor</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1784"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref84">84</a> Wilson ve Herrnstein, <em>Crime and human nature,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1785"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref85">85</a> Helmuth, “Has America’s tide of violence receded for good?”, 2000; Kelling ve Sousa, <em>Do police matter? An analysis of the impact of New York City’s police reforms,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1786"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref86">86</a> <em>Time,</em> 17 Ekim 1969, s. 47.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1787"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref87">87</a> Kennedy, <em>Race, crime, and the law</em>, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1788"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref88">88</a> National Defense Council Foundation, Alexandria, Va.: <a href="http://www.ndcf.org/index.htm">www.ndcf.org/index.htm</a>.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1789"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref89">89</a> Aktaran: Glover, <em>İnsanlık: Yirminci Yüzyılın Ahlaki Tarihi</em>, 1999 [2003], s. 227.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1790"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref90">90</a> Horowitz, <em>The deadly ethnic riot,</em> 2001; Keegan, <em>The face of battle,</em> 1976.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1791"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref91">91</a> C. Nickerson, “Canadians remain gun-shy of Americans”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 11 Şubat 2001</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1792"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref92">92</a> Aktaran: Wright, <em>NonZero: The logic of human destiny,</em> 2000, s. 61.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1793"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref93">93</a> Chagnon, “Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal population”, 1988 ve <em>Yanomamö: The last days of Eden,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1794"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref94">94</a> Axelrod, <em>The evolution of cooperation,</em> 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1795"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref95">95</a> Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 159.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1796"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref96">96</a> Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 202.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1797"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref97">97</a> Axelrod, <em>The evolution of cooperation,</em> 1984; Ridley, <em>The origins of virtue: Human instincts and the evolution of cooperation,</em> 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1798"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref98">98</a> Glover, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999 [2003], s. 231-232.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1799"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref99">99</a> M. J. Wilkinson, kişisel iletişim, 29 Ekim 2001; Wilkinson, “The Greek-Turkish-American triangle”, basım aşamasında.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n17100"><a class="backref" href="../Text/17.xhtml#ref100">100</a> Bkz. 3. ve 13. Bölümler. Ayrıca Fodor ve Pylyshyn, “Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis”, 1988; Miller, Galanter ve Pribram, <em>Plans and the structure of behavior,</em> 1960; Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, 2. bölüm; Pinker, <em>Words and rules: The ingredients of language,</em> 1999, 1. bölüm.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">18 Toplumsal Cinsiyet</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n181"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Aktaran: Jaggar, <em>Feminist politics and human nature,</em> 1983, s. 27.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n182"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref2">2</a> J. N. Wilford, “Sexes equal on South Sea isle”, <em>New York Times,</em> 29 Mart 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n183"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref3">3</a> L. Tye, “Girls appear to be closing aggression gap with boys”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 26 Mart 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n184"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref4">4</a> M. Zoll, “What about the boys?” <em>Boston Globe,</em> 23 Nisan 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n185"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Aktaran: Young, <em>Ceasefire!,</em> 1999, s. 247.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n186"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Crittenden, <em>What our mothers didn’t tell us: Why happiness eludes the modern woman,</em> 1999; Shalit, <em>A return to modesty: Discovering the lost virtue,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n187"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref7">7</a> L. Kass, “The end of courtship”, <em>Public Interest</em>, 126, Kış 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n188"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Patai, <em>Heterophobia: Sexual harassment and the future of feminism,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n189"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Grant, <em>Fundamental feminism: Contesting the core concepts of feminist theory,</em> 1993; Jaggar, <em>Feminist politics and human nature,</em> 1983; Tong, <em>Feminist thought: A more comprehensive introduction,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1810"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Sommers, <em>Who stole feminism?,</em> 1994, s. 22. Ayrıca bkz. Jaggar, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1983.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1811"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Gilligan, <em>In a different voice: Psychological theory and women’s development</em>, 1982.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1812"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Jaffe ve Hyde, “Gender differences in moral orientation”, 2000; Sommers, <em>Who stole feminism?,</em> 1994, 7. bölüm; Walker, “Sex differences in the development of moral reasoning: A critical review”, 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1813"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Belenky ve diğerleri, <em>Women’s ways of knowing,</em> 1986.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1814"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Denfeld, <em>The new Victorians: A young woman’s challenge to the old feminist order,</em> 1995; Kaminer, <em>A fearful freedom: Women’s flight from equality,</em> 1990; Lehrman, <em>The lipstick proviso: Women, sex, and power in the real world,</em> 1997; McElroy, <em>Sexual correctness: The gender-feminist attack on women,</em> 1996; Paglia, <em>Sex, art and American culture,</em> 1992; Patai, <em>Heterophobia: Sexual harassment and the future of feminism,</em> 1998; Patai ve Koertge, <em>Professing feminism: Cautionary tales from the strange world of women’s studies,</em> 1994; Sommers, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Taylor, <em>Reclaiming the mainstream: Individualist feminism rediscovered,</em> 1992; Young, <em>Ceasefire!,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1815"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Denfeld, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; Lehrman, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997; Roiphe, <em>The morning after: Sex, fear, and feminism on campus,</em> 1993; Walker, <em>To be real: Telling the truth and changing the face of feminism,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1816"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref16">16</a> S. Boxer, “One casualty of the women’s movement: Feminism”, <em>New York Times,</em> 14 Aralık 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1817"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref17">17</a> C. Paglia, “Crying wolf”, <em>Salon,</em> 7 Şubat 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1818"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Patai, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Sommers, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1819"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Trivers, “Dawkins’in <em>Gen Bencildir</em> adlı kitabının önsözü”, 1976, “Sociobiology and politics”, 1981 ve <em>Social evolution,</em> 1985.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1820"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Trivers ve Willard, “Natural selection of parental ability to vary the sex ratio of offspring”, 1973.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1821"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Jensen, <em>The g factor: The science of mental ability,</em> 1998, 13. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1822"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Blum, <em>Sex on the brain: The biological differences between men and women,</em> 1997; Eagly, “The science and politics of comparing women and men”, 1995; Geary, <em>Male, female: The evolution of human sex differences,</em> 1998; Halpern, <em>Sex differences in cognitive abilities,</em> 2000; Kimura, <em>Sex and cognition,</em> 1999</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1823"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Salmon ve Symons, <em>Warrior lovers,</em> 2001; Symons, <em>The evolution of human sexuality,</em> 1979.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1824"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Homicide,</em> 1988. Ameliyatla ilgili anektod: Barry, <em>Dave Barry’s complete guide to guys,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1825"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Maccoby ve Jacklin, <em>The psychology of sex differences,</em> 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1826"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Halpern, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Kimura, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1827"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Blum, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997; Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Halpern, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Hedges ve Nowell, “Sex differences in mental test scores, variability, and numbers of high-scoring individuals”, 1995; Lubinski ve Benbow, “Gender differences in abilities and preferences among the gifted: Implications for the math-science pipeline”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1828"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Hedges ve Nowell, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; Lubinski ve Benbow, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1829"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Blum, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997; Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Halpern, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Kimura, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1830"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Provine, “Laughter punctuates speech: Linguistic, social, and gender contexts of laughter”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1831"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref31">31</a> Hrdy, <em>Mother nature: A history of mothers, infants and natural selection,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1832"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Fausto-Sterling, <em>Myths of gender: Biological theories about women and men,</em> 1985, s. 152-153.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1833"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Brown, <em>Human universals,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1834"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Buss, <em>Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind,</em> 1999; Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Ridley, <em>The red queen: Sex and the evolution of human nature,</em> 1993; Symons, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1979; Trivers, “Parental investment and sexual selection”, 1972.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1835"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Daly ve Wilson, <em>Sex, evolution and behavior,</em> 1983; Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Hauser, <em>Wild minds: What animals really think,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1836"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Silverman ve Eals, “Sex differences in spatial abilities: Evolutio naıy theory and data”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1837"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Gibbons, “Europeans trace ancestry to Paleolithic people”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1838"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Blum, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997; Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Gur ve Gur, “Gender differences in neuropsychological functions”, basım aşamasında; Gur ve diğerleri, “Sex differences in brain gray and white matter in healthy young adults: Correlations with cognitive performance”, 1999; Halpern, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Jensen, <em>The g factor: The science of mental ability,</em> 1998; Kimura, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999; Neisser ve diğerleri, “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1839"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Dabbs ve Dabbs, <em>Heroes, rogues and lovers: Testosterone and behavior,</em> 2000; Geary, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; Halpern, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Kimura, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999; Sapolsky, <em>The trouble with testosterone…</em>, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1840"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref40">40</a> A. Sullivan, “Testosterone power”, <em>Women’s Quarterly</em>, Yaz 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1841"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Kimura, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1842"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref42">42</a> Blum, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1997; Gangestad ve Thornhill, “Menstrual cycle variation in women’s preferences for the scent of symmetrical men”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1843"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Blum, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1997; Geary, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998; Halpern, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 2000; Kimura, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1844"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Symons, <em>The evolution of human sexuality,</em> 1979, 9. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1845"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Reiner, “Cloacal exstrophy”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1846"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Aktaran: Halpern, <em>Sex differences in cognitive abilities,</em> 2000, s. 9.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1847"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Aktaran: Colapinto, <em>Doğanın yarattığı gibi: Kız gibi yetiştirilen bir erkeğin olağandışı yaşam öyküsü,</em> 2000 [2002]; Diamond ve Sigmundson, “Sex reassignment at birth: Long-term review and clinical implications”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1848"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Skuse ve diğerleri, “Evidence from Turner’s Syndrome of an imprinted X-linked locus affecting cognitive function”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1849"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Barkley ve diğerleri, “The effects of sex typing and sex appropriateness of modeled behavior on children’s imitation”, 1977; Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do,</em> 1998; Lytton ve Romney, “Parents’ differential socialization of boys and girls: A meta-analysis”, 1991; Maccoby ve Jacklin, <em>The psychology of sex differences,</em> 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1850"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref50">50</a> B. Friedan, “The future of feminism”, <em>Free Inquiry</em>, Yaz 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1851"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref51">51</a> “Land of plenty: Diversity as America’s competitive edge in science, engineering, and technology”, Bilim, Mühendislik ve Teknoloji Geliştirme Alanlarında Kadınlar ve Azınlıkların İlerleyişiyle İlgili Meclis Komisyonu Raporu, Eylül 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1852"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref52">52</a> J. Alper, “The pipeline is leaking women all the way along”, <em>Science</em>, 260, 16 Nisan 1993; J. Mervis, “Efforts to boost diversity face persistent problems”, <em>Science</em>, 284, 11 Haziran 1999; J. Mervis, “Diversity: Easier said than done”, <em>Science</em>, 289, 16 Mart 2000; J. Mervis, “NSF searches for right way to help women” ve “Gender equity: NSF program targets institutional change”, <em>Science</em>, 291, 21 Temmuz 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1853"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref53">53</a> J. Mervis, “Efforts to boost diversity face persistent problems”, <em>Science</em>, 284, 11 Haziran 1999, s. 1757.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1854"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref54">54</a> P. Healy, “Faculty shortage: Women in sciences”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 31 Ocak 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1855"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Holden, “Parity as a goal sparks bitter battle”, 2000, s. 380.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1856"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref56">56</a> Aktaran: Young, <em>Ceasefire!,</em> 1999, s. 22, 34-35.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1857"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref57">57</a> Estrich, <em>Sex and power,</em> 2000; Furchtgott-Roth ve Stolba, <em>Women’s figures: An illustrated guide to the economic progress of women in America,</em> 1999; Goldin, <em>Understanding the gender gap: An economic history of American workers,</em> 1990; Gottfredson, “Reconsidering fairness: A matter of social and ethical priorities”, 1988; Hausman, <em>On the rarity of mathematically and mechanically gifted females,</em> 1999; Kleinfeld, <em>MIT tarnishes its reputation with gender junk science,</em> 1999; Lehrman, <em>The lipstick proviso: Women, sex, and power in the real world,</em> 1997; Lubinski ve Benbow, “Gender differences in abilities and preferences among the gifted: Implications for the math-science pipeline”, 1992; Roback, “Beyond equality”, 1993; Schwartz, <em>Breaking with tradition: Women and work, the new facts of life,</em> 1992; Young, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1858"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref58">58</a> Browne, <em>Divided labors: An evolutionary view of women at work,</em> 1998; Furchtgott-Roth ve Stolba, <em>Women’s figures…,</em> 1999; Goldin, <em>Understanding the gender gap…,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1859"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref59">59</a> Uluslararası Çocuk Dili Çalışmaları Birliği’nin rastgele seçtiğim 100 üyesinin 75’i kadın 25’i erkekti. Stanford Çocuk Dili Araştırmaları Forumu geçmişteki 18 açılış konuşmacısını internet sitesinde sıralıyor (csli.stanford.edu/~clrf/histoiy.html): 15 kadın ve 3 erkek.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1860"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref60">60</a> Browne, <em>Divided labors: An evolutionary view of women at work,</em> 1998; Furchtgott-Roth ve Stolba, <em>Women’s figures…,</em> 1999; Goldin, <em>Understanding the gender gap…,</em> 1990; Gottfredson, “Reconsidering fairness: A matter of social and ethical priorities”, 1988; Kleinfeld, <em>MIT tarnishes its reputation with gender junk science,</em> 1999; Roback, “Beyond equality”, 1993; Young, <em>Ceasefire!,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1861"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref61">61</a> Lubinski ve Benbow, “Gender differences in abilities and preferences among the gifted: Implications for the math-science pipeline”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1862"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref62">62</a> Bkz. Browne, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998. Ayrıca bkz. Estrich, <em>Sex and power,</em> 2000; Furchtgott-Roth ve Stolba, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999; Goldin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990; Gottfredson, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1988; Hausman, <em>On the rarity of mathematically and mechanically gifted females,</em> 1999; Kleinfeld, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999; Lehrman, <em>The lipstick proviso: Women, sex, and power in the real world,</em> 1997; Lubinskive Benbow, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1992; Roback, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1993; Schwartz, <em>Breaking with tradition: Women and work, the new facts of life,</em> 1992; Young, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1863"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref63">63</a> Buss, “Mate preference mechanisms: Consequences for partner choice and intrasexual competition”, 1992; Ellis, “The evolution of sexual attraction: Evaluative mechanisms in women”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1864"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref64">64</a> Browne, <em>Divided labors: An evolutionary view of women at work,</em> 1998; Hrdy, <em>Mother nature: A history of mothers, infants and natural selection,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1865"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref65">65</a> Roback, “Beyond equality”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1866"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref66">66</a> Becker, <em>A treatise on the family,</em> 1991.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1867"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref67">67</a> Furchtgott-Roth ve Stolba, <em>Women’s figures</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1868"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref68">68</a> Aktaran: C. Young, “Sex and science”, <em>Salon</em>, 12 Nisan 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1869"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref69">69</a> Aktaran: Holden, “Parity as a goal sparks bitter battle”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1870"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref70">70</a> Aktaran: Holden, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1871"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref71">71</a> Kleinfeld, <em>MIT tarnishes its reputation with gender junk science,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1872"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref72">72</a> National Science Foundation: <em>Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science and Engineering: 1998</em>, <a href="http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf99338">www.nsf.gov</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1873"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref73">73</a> “Report on the situation of human rights in the territory of the former Yugoslavia”, 1993. Birleşmiş Milletler Belgesi E/CN.4/1993/50.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1874"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref74">74</a> J. E. Beals, “Ending the silence on sexual violence”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 10 Nisan 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1875"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref75">75</a> R. Haynor, “Violence against women”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 22 Ekim 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1876"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref76">76</a> Brownmiller, <em>Against our will: Men, women, and rape</em>, 1975, s. 14.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1877"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref77">77</a> Young, <em>Ceasefire!,</em> 1999, s. 139.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1878"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref78">78</a> McElroy, <em>Sexual correctness: The gender-feminist attack on women,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1879"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref79">79</a> McElroy, <em>Sexual correctness: The gender-feminist attack on women,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1880"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref80">80</a> Thiessen ve Young, “Investigating sexual coercion”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1881"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref81">81</a> Dworkin, “Sexual economics: The terrible truth”, 1993.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1882"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref82">82</a> Tooby ve Cosmides, “Reply to Jerry Coyne”: <a href="http://www.psych.ucsb.edu/research/cep/tnr.html">www.psych.ucsb.edu</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1883"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref83">83</a> Gordon ve Riger, <em>The female fear: The social cost of rape,</em> 1991, s. 47</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1884"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref84">84</a> Rose ve Rose, <em>Alas, poor Darwin! Arguments against evolutionary psychology,</em> 2000, s. 139.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1885"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref85">85</a> M. Wertheim, “Born to rape?” <em>Salon,</em> 29 Şubat 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1886"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref86">86</a> G. Miller, “Why men rape”, <em>Evening Standard,</em> 6 Mart 2000, s. 53.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1887"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref87">87</a> Symons, <em>The evolution of human sexuality,</em> 1979; Thornhill ve Palmer, <em>A natural history of rape</em> …, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1888"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref88">88</a> Jones, “Sex, culture, and the biology of rape: Toward explanation and prevention”, 1999. Ayrıca bkz. Check ve Malamuth, “An empirical assessment of some feminist hypotheses about rape”, 1985; Ellis ve Beattie, “The feminist explanation for rape: An empirical test”, 1983; Symons, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1979; Thornhill ve Palmer, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1889"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref89">89</a> Gottschall ve Gottschall, “The reproductive success of rapists: An exploration of the per-incident rape-pregnancy rate”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1890"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref90">90</a> Jones, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1999, s. 890.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1891"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref91">91</a> Adalet İstatistikleri Bürosu: <a href="http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs">www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs</a>.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1892"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref92">92</a> Aktaran: A. Humphreys, “Lawyers may use genetics study in rape defense”, <em>National Post</em> (Kanada), 22 Ocak 2000, s. A8.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1893"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref93">93</a> Aktaran: Jones, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1894"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref94">94</a> Paglia, <em>Cinsel kimlikler: Nefertiti’den Emily Dickinson’a sanat ve dekadans</em>, 1990 [2004], s. 51, 57.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1895"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref95">95</a> McElroy, <em>Sexual correctness: The gender-feminist attack on women,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1896"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref96">96</a> J. Phillips, “Exploring inside to live on the outside”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 21 Mart 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1897"><a class="backref" href="../Text/18.xhtml#ref97">97</a> S. Satel, “The patriarchy made me do it”, <em>Women’s Freedom Newsletter,</em> 5, Eylül/Ekim 1998.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">19 Çocuklar</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n191"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Turkheimer, “Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n192"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Goldberg, “Simple models or simple processes? Some research on clinical judgments”, 1968; Janda, <em>Psychological testing: Theory and applications,</em> 1998; Neisser ve diğerleri, “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n193"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Jensen, “A note on why genetic correlations are not squared”, 1971.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n194"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n195"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Bouchard, “Genes, environment, and personality”, 1994 ve “Genetic and environmental influences on intelligence and special mental abilities”, 1998; Bouchard ve diğerleri, “Sources of human psychological differences: The Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart”, 1990; Loehlin, <em>Genes and environment in personality development,</em> 1992; Plomin, <em>Genetics and experience: The interplay between nature and nurture,</em> 1994; Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n196"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n197"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref7">7</a> McLearn ve diğerleri, “Substantial genetic influence on cognitive abilities in twins 80 or more years old”, 1997; Plomin, Owen ve McGuffin, “The genetic basis of complex human behaviors”, 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n198"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref8">8</a> Bouchard, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994 ve a.g.y, 1998; Bouchard ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990; Loehlin, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1992; Lykken ve diğerleri, “Emergenesis: Genetic traits that may not run in families”, 1992; Plomin, “The role of inheritance in behavior”, 1990 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Stromswold, “Genetics of spoken language disorders”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n199"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1910"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Bouchard ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990; Plomin, “Continuing commentary: Why children in the same family are so different from one another”, 1991 ve <em>a.g.e.</em> 1994; Plomin ve Daniels, “Why are children in the same family so different from one another?”, 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1911"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Bouchard ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990; Pedersen ve diğerleri, “Effects of early rearing environment on twin similarity in the last half of the life span”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1912"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Bouchard ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990; Bouchard, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1913"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Scarr ve Carter-Saltzman, “Twin method: Defense of a critical assumption”, 1979.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1914"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Loehlin ve Nichols, <em>Heredity, environment and personality: A study of 850 sets of twins,</em> 1976.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1915"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Bouchard, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998; Gutknecht, Spitz ve Carlier, “Long-term effect of placental type on anthropometrical and psychological traits among monozygotic twins…”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1916"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref16">16</a> McGue, “The democracy of the genes”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1917"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Etcoff, <em>Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty,</em> 1999; Pérsico, Postlewaite ve Silverman, <em>The effect of adolescent experience on labor market outcomes: The case of height,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1918"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Jackson ve Huston, “Physical attractiveness and assertiveness”, 1975.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1919"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Bouchard, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Bouchard ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1920"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Kamin, <em>The science and politics of IQ,</em> 1974; Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes,</em> 1984, s. 116.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1921"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Neisser ve diğerleri, “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns”, 1996; Snyderman ve Rothman, <em>The IQ controversy: The media and public policy,</em> 1988.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1922"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Hunt, <em>The new know-nothings: The political foes of the scientific study of human nature,</em> 1999, s. 50-51.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1923"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Plomin ve Daniels, “Why are children in the same family so different from one another?”, 1987; Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics</em>, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1924"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Bouchard, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1994; Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do</em>, 1998; Plomin ve Daniels, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1987; Rowe, <em>The limits of family influence: Genes, experience, and behavior</em>, 1994; Turkheimer ve Waldron, “Nonshared environment: A theoretical, methodological, and quantitative review”, 2000. Krueger, Hicks ve McGue, “Altruism and antisocial behavior: Independent tendencies, unique personality correlates, distinct etiologies”, 2001 kitabında yer alan ve özgeciliğin ortak çevreden etkilendiği tezine dair bulgulara başka bir çalışma tarafından ulaşılmamıştır; ayrıca bu tez aynı yöntemlerin daha büyük bir denek grubuyla birlikte kullanıldığı Rushton ve diğerlerinin “Altruism and aggression: The heritability of individual differences”, 1986 araştırmasının sonuçlarıyla çelişir.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1925"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Stoolmiller, “Implications of the restricted range of family environments for estimates of heritability and nonshared environment in behavior-genetic adoption studies”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1926"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref26">26</a> Bouchard ve diğerleri, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1990; Plomin ve Daniels, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987; Reiss ve diğerleri, <em>The relationship code: Deciphering genetic and social influences on adolescent development,</em> 2000; Rowe, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1927"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Plomin, “Continuing commentary: Why children in the same family are so different from one another”, 1991; Plomin ve Daniels, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987, s. 6; Plomin ve diğerleri, <em>Behavior genetics,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1928"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Bouchard, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Plomin ve Daniels, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1987; Rowe, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1994; Turkheimer, “Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean”, 2000; Turkheimer ve Waldron, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1929"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Schütze, “The good mother: The history of the normative model ‘mother-love’”, 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1930"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref30">30</a> B. Singer, “How to raise a perfect child…”, <em>Boston Globe Magazine</em>, 26 Mart 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1931"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref31">31</a> D. Barry, “Is your kid’s new best friend named ‘Bessie? Be very afraid”, <em>Miami Herald,</em> 31 Ekim 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1932"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref32">32</a> <em>June Cleaver.</em> Bir Amerikan tv dizisinde Barbara Billingsley’in canlandırdığı kahraman. Geleneksel anne karakterini temsil eder. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1933"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do,</em> 1998, 2. Bölüm; Lytton, “Child effects - Still unwelcome? Response to Dogge and Wahler”, 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1934"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Harris, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, 4. bölüm ve “Socialization, personality development and the child’s environments: Comment on Vandell (2000)”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1935"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Harris, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998, s. 319-320, 323.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1936"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Harris, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998, “The trouble with assumptions”, 1998, “Research on child development: What we can learn from medical research”, 2000 ve <em>a.g.e.</em>, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1937"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref37">37</a> <em>The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet:</em> 1952 ila 1966 arasında yayınlanan ve Nelson ailesinin gerçek yaşamını yansıtan bir Amerikan komedi dizisi. 1950’lerde ideal Amerikan ailesi yaşamıyla eşanlamlı tutulmuştur. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1938"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref38">38</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption</em> 1998, 2. ve 3. Bölümler; Maccoby ve Martin, “Socialization in the context of the family: Parent-child interaction”, 1983.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1939"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption</em> 1998, s. 300-311.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1940"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Bruer, <em>The myth of the first three years: A new understanding of brain development and life long learning,</em> 1999, s. 5.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1941"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref41">41</a> Chabris, “Prelude or requiem for the “Mozart effect”?”, 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1942"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref42">42</a> T. B. Brazelton, “To curb teenage smoking, nurture children in their earliest years”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 21 Mayıs 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1943"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref43">43</a> Collins ve diğerleri, “Contemporary research on parenting: The case for nature and nurture”, 2000; Vandell, “Parents, peer groups, and other socializing influences”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1944"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Harris, “Where is the child’s environment? A group socialization theory of development”, 1995, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2000; Loehlin, “Behavior genetics and parenting theory”, 2001; Rowe, “The nurture assumption persists”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1945"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref45">45</a> Plomin, DeFries ve Fulker, <em>Nature and nurture in infancy and early childhood,</em> 1988; Reiss ve diğerleri, <em>The relationship code: Deciphering genetic and social influences on adolescent development,</em> 2000; Turkheimer ve Waldron, “Nonshared environment: A theoretical, methodological, and quantitative review”, 2000</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1946"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref46">46</a> D. Reiss, aktaran: A. M. Paul, “Kid stuff: Do parents really matter?”, <em>Psychology Today,</em> Ocak-Şubat 1998, s. 46-49, 78.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1947"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref47">47</a> Sulloway, “Birth order and evolutionary psychology…”, 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1948"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref48">48</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption</em> …, 1998, Ek 1; Harris, “Personality and birth order: Explaining the differences between siblings”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1949"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Hrdy, <em>Mother nature: A history of mothers, infants and natural selection,</em> 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1950"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Dunphy, “The social structure of early adolescent peer groups”, 1963.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1951"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Pinker, <em>The language instinct,</em> 1994, 2. ve 9. Bôlümler.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1952"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref52">52</a> Kosof, <em>Living in two worlds: The immigrant children’s experience,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1953"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption</em> 1998, 9., 12., 13. Bölümler ve s. 264.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1954"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Harris, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, 13. Bölüm; Rowe, <em>The limits of family influence: Genes, experience and behavior,</em> 1994; Rutter, “Nature-nurture integration: The example of antisocial behavior”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1955"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref55">55</a> Gottfredson ve Hirschi, <em>A general theory of crime,</em> 1990; Harris, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, 13. Bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1956"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref56">56</a> Harris, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, 8. Bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1957"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref57">57</a> M. Wertheim, “Mindfield” (Pinker’ın <em>How the mind works</em> adlı kitabının incelemesi), <em>The Australian’s Review of Books</em>, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1958"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref58">58</a> O. James, “It’s a free market on the nature of nurture”, <em>The Independent,</em> 20 Ekim 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1959"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref59">59</a> <a href="www.philipmorrisusa.com/DisplayPage/WithTopic.asp?ID=189">www.philipmorrisusa.com</a>. Ayrıca bkz. Anheuser-Busch’un sitesi: <a href="www.beeresponsible.com/ftad/review.html">www.beeresponsible.com</a></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1960"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref60">60</a> J. Leo, “Parenting without a care”, <em>US News and World Report,</em> 21 Eylül 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1961"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref61">61</a> Aktaran: J. Leo, “Parenting without a care”, <em>US News and World Report,</em> 21 Eylül 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1962"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref62">62</a> S. Begley, “The parent trap”, <em>Newsweek,</em> 7 Eylül, 1998, s. 54</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1963"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref63">63</a> J. Kagan, “A parent’s influence is peerless”, <em>Boston Globe,</em> 13 Eylül 1998, s. E3.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1964"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref64">64</a> Harris, “The trouble with assumptions”, 1998, “Research on child development: What we can learn from medical research”, 2000, “Socialization, personality development, and the child’s environments…”, 2000; Loehlin, “Behavior genetics and parenting theory”, 2001; Rowe, “The nurture assumption persists”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1965"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref65">65</a> Ayrıca bkz. Miller, “Could nonshared environmental variation have evolved to assure diversification through randomness?”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1966"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref66">66</a> Austad, “Varied fates from similar states”, 2000; Finch ve Kirkwood, <em>Chance, development and aging,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1967"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref67">67</a> Hartman, Garvik ve Hartwell, “Principles for the buffering of genetic variation”, 2001; Waddington, <em>The strategy of the genes,</em> 1957.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1968"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref68">68</a> Harris, <em>The nurture assumption:…,</em> 1998, s. 78-79</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1969"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref69">69</a> Aktaran: B. M. Rubin, “Raising a ruckus being a parent is difficult, but is it necessary?” <em>Chicago Tribune,</em> 31 Ağustos 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1970"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref70">70</a> <em>Goodnight Moon:</em> Margaret Wise Brown’ın ünlü çocuk kitabı. –<em>çev. notu</em></p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1971"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref71">71</a> Harris, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, s. 291.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n1972"><a class="backref" href="../Text/19.xhtml#ref72">72</a> Harris, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998, s. 342.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">20 Hümanist Disiplinler</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="n201"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref1">1</a> R. Brustein, “The decline of high culture”, <em>New Republic,</em> 3 Kasım 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n202"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Edebiyatın…: A. Kernan, Yale University Press, 1992; Edebiyatın…: A. Delbanco, <em>New York Review of Books</em>, 4 Kasım 1999; Yüksek…: R. Brustein, <em>New Republic,</em> 3 Kasım 1997; Beşerî…: Stanford Üniversitesi Beşerî Bilimler Merkezi’nde Gerçekleştirilen Konferans, 23 Nisan 1999; Beşerî…: G. Steiner, <em>PN Review</em>, 25, Mart-Nisan 1999; Para…: J. Engell ve A. Dangerfield, <em>Harvard Magazine,</em> Mayıs/Haziran 1998, s. 48-55, 111; Beşerî…: A. Louch, <em>Philosophy and Literature,</em> 22 Nisan 1998, s. 231-241; Edebiyat…: C. Woodring, Columbia University Press, 1999; Edebiyatı…: J. M. Ellis, Yale University Press, 1997; Müzik…: G. Wheatcroft, <em>Prospect,</em> Ağustos/Eylül 1998; İngilizcenin…: R. E. Scholes, Yale University Press, 1998; Beşerî…: A. Kernan (Ed.), Princeton University Press, 1997; Kültürü…: C. P. Freund, <em>Reason,</em> Mart 1998, s. 33-38.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n203"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Aktaran: Cowen, <em>In praise of commercial culture,</em> 1998, s. 9-10.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n204"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref4">4</a> J. Engell ve A. Dangerfield, “Humanities in the age of money”, <em>Harvard Magazine,</em> Mayıs/Haziran 1998, s. 48-55, 111.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n205"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Cowen, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998; N. Gillespie, “All culture, all the time”, <em>Reason,</em> Nisan 1999.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n206"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Cowen, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n207"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Aktaran: Cowen, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1998, s. 188.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n208"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref8">8</a> İfadenin aslı “insan karakteri değişti”; “Kurmacada Karakter” adlı makalesinden.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n209"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref9">9</a> Crick, <em>Şaşırtan varsayım: İnsan varlığının temel sorularına yanıt arayışı</em>, 1994 [2009]; Gardner, <em>Zihin çerçeveleri</em>…, 1983 [2004]; Peretz, Gagnon ve Bouchard, “Music and emotion: Perceptual determinants, immediacy and isolation after brain damage”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2010"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref10">10</a> Miller, <em>Sevişen beyin: Eş bulma süreci insan doğasını nasıl belirledi?</em>, 2000 [2010].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2011"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref11">11</a> Dutton, “Aesthetic universals”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2012"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref12">12</a> Dissanayake, <em>Homo aestheticus: Where art comes from and why,</em> 1992 ve <em>Art and intimacy: How the arts began,</em> 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2013"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref13">13</a> Pinker, <em>How the mind works,</em> 1997, 8. bölüm.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2014"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref14">14</a> Marr, <em>Vision,</em> 1982; Pinker, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1997, 8. bölüm; Ramachandran ve Hirstein, “The science of art”, 1999; Shepard, <em>Mind sights: Original visual illusions, ambiguities, and other anomalies,</em> 1990. Ayrıca bkz. Gombrich, <em>The sense of order: A study in the psychology of decorative art,</em> 1982/1995; Miller, “Aesthetic fitness: How sexual selection shaped artistic virtuosity as a fitness indicator and aesthetic preferences as mate choice criteria”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2015"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref15">15</a> Kaplan, “Environmental preference in a knowledge-seeking, knowledge-using organism”, 1992; Orians, “Human behavioral ecology: 140 years without Darwin is too long”, 1998; Orians ve Heerwgen, “Evolved responses to landscapes”, 1992; Wilson, <em>Biophilia,</em> 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2016"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref16">16</a> Wilson, <em>Biophilia,</em> 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2017"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref17">17</a> Etcoff, <em>Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty,</em> 1999; Symons, “Beauty is in the adaptations of the beholder…”, 1995; Thornhill, “Darwinian aesthetics”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2018"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref18">18</a> Tooby ve DeVore, “The reconstruction of hominid evolution through strategic modeling”, 1987.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2019"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref19">19</a> Abbott, “Imagination and the adapted mind: A special double issue”, 2001; Pinker, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2020"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref20">20</a> Dissanayake, “Komar and Melamid discover Pleistocene taste”, 1998 ve <em>Homo aestheticus: Where art comes from and why</em>, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2021"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref21">21</a> Frank, <em>Luxury fever: When money fails to satisfy in an era of excess</em>, 1999; Veblen, <em>Aylak sınıfın teorisi</em>, 1899/1994.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2022"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref22">22</a> Zahavi ve Zahavi, <em>The handicap principle: A missing piece of Darwin’s puzzle</em>, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2023"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref23">23</a> Miller, <em>Sevişen beyin: Eş bulma süreci insan doğasını nasıl belirledi?,</em> 2000 [2010], s. 270 [255].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2024"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref24">24</a> Bell, <em>On human finery,</em> 1992; Wolfe, <em>The painted word,</em> 1975 ve <em>Bauhaus ve sonrası,</em> 1981 [2006].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2025"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref25">25</a> Bourdieu, <em>Distinction: A social critique of the judgment of taste,</em> 1984.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2026"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref26">26</a> 1757 tarihli “Beğeni standartı üzerine” adlı makalesinden; aktaran: Dutton, “Aesthetic universals”, 2001, s. 206.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2027"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref27">27</a> Dutton, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001, s. 213.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2028"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref28">28</a> Dutton, “America’s most wanted, and why no one wants it”, 1998; Komar, Melamid ve Wypijewski, <em>Painting by numbers: Komar and Melamid’s scientific guide to art</em>, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2029"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref29">29</a> Dissanayake, “Komar and Melamid discover Pleistocene taste”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2030"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref30">30</a> Dutton, “America’s most wanted, and why no one wants it”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2031"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref31">31</a> <em>Lingua Franca</em>, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2032"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref32">32</a> Turner, “Modernism: Cure or disease?”, 1997, s. 170, 174-175.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2033"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref33">33</a> Etcoff, <em>Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty</em>, 1999; Kaplan, “Environmental preference in a knowledge-seeking, knowledge-using organism”, 1992; Orians ve Heerwgen, “Evolved responses to landscapes”, 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2034"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref34">34</a> Leslie, “ToMM, ToBY, and agency: Core architecture and domain specificity”, 1994; Schellenberg ve Trehub, “Natural musical intervals: Evidence from infant listeners”, 1996; Storey, <em>Mimesis and the human animal,</em> 1996; Zentner ve Kagan, “Perception of music by infants”, 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2035"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref35">35</a> Martindale, <em>The clockwork mouse: The predictability of artistic change,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2036"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref36">36</a> Steiner, <em>Venus in exile: The rejection of beauty in 20th-century art,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2037"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref37">37</a> Aktaran: Dutton, “Mad about flowers”, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2038"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref38">38</a> C. Darwent, “Art of staying pretty”, <em>New Statesman,</em> 13 Şubat 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2039"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref39">39</a> Steiner, <em>a.g.e.,</em> 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2040"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref40">40</a> Bell, <em>On human finery,</em> 1992.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2041"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref41">41</a> <em>The Onion</em>, 36, 21-27 Eylül 2000, s. L.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2042"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref42">42</a> J. Miller, “Is bad writing necessary? George Orwell, Theodor Adorno and the politics of language”, <em>Lingua Franca,</em> Aralık/Ocak, 2000.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2043"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref43">43</a> <a href="http://www.cybereditions.com/aldaily/bwc.htm">www.cybereditions.com/aldaily/bwc.htm</a>.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2044"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref44">44</a> Steiner, <em>Language and silence: Essays on language, literature and the inhuman</em>, 1967, önsöz.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2045"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref45">45</a> <em>New York Times</em>, 19 Eylül 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2046"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref46">46</a> Heykeltraş Janine Antoni; aktaran: G. Beauchamp, “Dissing the middle class: The view from Burns Park”, <em>American Scholar,</em> Yaz 1995, s. 335-349.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2047"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref47">47</a> K. Limaye, “Adieu to the Avant-Garde”, <em>Reason,</em> Temmuz 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2048"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref48">48</a> C. Darwent, “Art of staying pretty”, <em>New Statesman,</em> 13 Şubat 2000; C. Lambert, “The stirring of sleeping beauty”, <em>Harvard Magazine,</em> Eylül-Ekim 1999, s. 46-53; K. Limaye, “Adieu to the Avant-Garde”, <em>Reason,</em> Temmuz 1997; A. Delbanco, “The decline and fail of literature”, <em>New York Review of Books,</em> 4 Kasım 1999; Perloff, “In defense of poetry: Put the literature back into literary studies”, 1999; Turner, <em>Natural classicism: Essays on literature and science,</em> 1985; Turner, <em>The culture of hope,</em> 1995.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2049"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref49">49</a> Abbott, “Imagination and the adapted mind…”, 2001; Boyd, “Jane, meet Charles: Literature, evolution and human nature”, 1998; Carroll, <em>Evolution and literary theory,</em> 1995; Dutton, “Aesthetic universals”, 2001; Easterlin, Riebling ve Crews, <em>After poststructuralism: Interdisiplinarity and literary theory (rethinking theory),</em> 1993; Evans, “Evolution and literature”, 1998; Gottschall ve Jobling, <em>Evolutionary psychology and literary studies…;</em> Hernadi, “Literature and evolution”, 2001; Hogan, “Literary universals”, 1997; Steiner, <em>Venus in exile: The rejection of beauty in 20th-century art,</em> 2001; F. Turner, <em>Natural classicism…,</em> 1985 ve <em>a.g.e.,</em> 1995; M. Turner, <em>The literary mind,</em> 1996.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2050"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref50">50</a> Goguen, “Special Issue on Art and the Brain”, 1999; Gombrich, <em>The sense of order: A study in the psychology of decorative art,</em> 1982/1995; Kubovy, <em>The psychology of perspective and Renaissance art,</em> 1986.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2051"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref51">51</a> Aiello ve Sloboda, <em>Musical Perceptions,</em> 1994; Lerdahl ve Jackendoff, <em>A generative theory of tonal music,</em> 1983.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2052"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref52">52</a> Keyser, “Meter and poetry”, 1999; Keyser ve Halle, “On meter in general and on Robert Frost’s loose iambics in particular”, 1998; M. Turner, <em>Reading minds: The study of English in the age of cognitive science,</em> 1991; M. Turner, <em>The literary mind,</em> 1996; Williams, <em>Style: Toward clarity and grace,</em> 1990.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2053"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref53">53</a> Scarry, <em>Kitapla hayal etmek,</em> 1999 [2006].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2054"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref54">54</a> Abbott, “Imagination and the adapted mind…”, 2001.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2055"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref55">55</a> A. Quart, “David Bordwell blows the whistle on film studies”, <em>Lingua Franca,</em> Mart 2000, s. 35-43.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2056"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref56">56</a> Abbott, <em>a.g.e.</em>, 2001; Aiken, <em>The biological origins of art</em>, 1998; Cooke ve Turner, <em>Biopoetics: Evolutionary explorations in the arts</em>, 1999; Dissanayake, <em>Homo aestheticus: Where art comes from and why</em>, 1992; Etcoff, <em>Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty</em>, 1999; Kaplan, “Environmental preference in a knowledge-seeking, knowledgeusing organism”, 1992; Orians ve Heerwgen, “Evolved responses to landscapes”, 1992; Thornhill, “Darwinian aesthetics”, 1998</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2057"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref57">57</a> Teuber, “Gertrude Stein, William James, and Pablo Picasso’s Cubism”, 1997.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2058"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref58">58</a> Behrens, “Art, design and gestalt theory”, 1998.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2059"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref59">59</a> Aktaran: Storey, <em>Mimesis and the human animal,</em> 1996, s. 182.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2060"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref60">60</a> A. S. Byatt, “Narrate or die”, <em>New York Times Magazine,</em> 18 Nisan 1999, s. 105-107.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2061"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref61">61</a> John Updike, “The tried and the trēowe”, <em>Forbes ASAP,</em> 2 Ekim 2000, s. 201, 215.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="n2062"><a class="backref" href="../Text/20.xhtml#ref62">62</a> Storey, <em>Mimesis and the human animal,</em> 1996, s. 114.</p>

  <h2 class="sigil_not_in_toc">IV. Kısım</h2>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart61"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part6.xhtml#ref1">1</a> Degler, <em>In search of human nature</em> 1991, s. 135.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart62"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part6.xhtml#ref2">2</a> Dickinson, <em>The complete poems of Emily Dickinson</em>, 1976.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart63"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part6.xhtml#ref3">3</a> Kurt Vonnegut, <em>Maymun evine hoş geldiniz,</em> 1968/1998 [2003].</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart64"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part6.xhtml#ref4">4</a> Örneğin: Gould, <em>The mismeasure of man,</em> 1981; Lewontin, Rose ve Kamin, <em>Not in our genes,</em> 1984, s. ix-x.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart65"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part6.xhtml#ref5">5</a> Orwell, <em>1984,</em> 1949/1983, s. 220.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart66"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part6.xhtml#ref6">6</a> Twain, <em>Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,</em> 1884/1983, s. 332 ve 339.</p>

  <p class="footnote" id="npart67"><a class="backref" href="../Text/part6.xhtml#ref7">7</a> Diyalog <em>Enemies, a love story</em> (1972, s. 68-78) ve film uyarlamasından özetlenmiştir</p>
</body>
</html>
